6
2
0
2

r
a

M
6
1

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
2
2
3
0
.
1
0
6
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

From Entropy to Epiplexity: Rethinking Information for
Computationally Bounded Intelligence

Marc Finzi∗1

Shikai Qiu∗2 Yiding Jiang∗1

Pavel Izmailov2

J. Zico Kolter1

Andrew Gordon Wilson2

1Carnegie Mellon University

2New York University

Abstract

Can we learn more from data than existed in the generating process itself? Can new and useful
information be constructed from merely applying deterministic transformations to existing data?
Can the learnable content in data be evaluated without considering a downstream task? On these
questions, Shannon information and Kolmogorov complexity come up nearly empty-handed, in part
because they assume observers with unlimited computational capacity and do not target the useful
information content. In this work, we identify and exemplify three seeming paradoxes in information
theory: (1) information cannot be increased by deterministic transformations; (2) information is
independent of the order of data; (3) likelihood modeling is merely distribution matching. To shed
light on the tension between these results and modern practice, and to quantify the value of data,
we introduce epiplexity †, a formalization of information capturing what computationally bounded
observers can learn from data. Epiplexity captures the structural content in data while excluding
time-bounded entropy, the random unpredictable content exemplified by pseudorandom number
generators and chaotic dynamical systems. With these concepts, we demonstrate how information
can be created with computation, how it depends on the ordering of the data, and how likelihood
modeling can produce more complex programs than present in the data generating process itself.
We also present practical procedures to estimate epiplexity which we show capture differences
across data sources, track with downstream performance, and highlight dataset interventions that
improve out-of-distribution generalization. In contrast to principles of model selection, epiplexity
provides a theoretical foundation for data selection, guiding how to select, generate, or transform
data for learning systems.

1 Introduction

As AI research progresses towards more general-purpose intelligent systems, cracks are beginning
to show in mechanisms for grounding mathematical intuitions. Much of learning theory is built
around controlling generalization error with respect to a given distribution, treating the training
distribution as fixed and focusing optimization effort on the choice of model. Yet modern systems
are expected to transfer across tasks, domains, and objectives that were not specified at training
time, often after large-scale pretraining on diverse and heterogeneous data. In this regime, success or
failure frequently hinges less on architectural choices than on what data the model was exposed to in
the first place. Pursuing broad generalization to diverse out-of-distribution tasks forces a shift in
perspective: instead of treating data as given and optimizing for in-distribution performance, we need
to choose and curate data to facilitate generalization to unseen tasks. This shift makes the value of
data itself a central question—how much usable, transferable information can a model acquire from
training? In other words, instead of model selection, how do we perform data selection? On this
question, existing theory offers little guidance and often naively contradicts empirical observations.

*Equal contribution.
†Code available at https://github.com/shikaiqiu/epiplexity.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Random vs structural information for computationally bounded observers. (Left)
Illustration of random vs structural information of different data for computationally bounded observers,
which we formalize with time-bounded entropy and epiplexity (Section 3) and can be estimated from loss
curves of neural networks trained on that data (Section 4). (Top Right) Unlike other forms of information,
time-bounded entropy and epiplexity can be increased through computational processes, such as simulating
dynamical systems (cellular automation, Lorenz equations) and interventions like changing the data ordering,
which can produce apparent randomness but also learnable, emergent structures like gliders and the Lorenz
attractor invariant measure (Section 5). (Bottom Right) Whereas time-bounded entropy captures the
in-distribution randomness and unpredictability, epiplexity measures the amount of structural information
the model extracts from the data to its weights, which can be useful for OOD tasks such as by reusing learned
circuits shared between the in-distribution and OOD tasks.

Consider synthetic data, crucial for further developing model capabilities (Abdin et al., 2024; Maini
et al., 2024) when existing natural data are exhausted. Existing concepts in information theory
like the data processing inequality appear to suggest that synthetic data adds no additional value.
Questions about what information is transferred to a given model seem naturally within the purview
of information theory, yet, quantifying this information with existing tools proves to be elusive. Even
basic questions, such as the source of the information in the weights of an AlphaZero game-playing
model (Silver et al., 2018), are surprisingly tricky to answer. AlphaZero takes in zero human data,
learning merely from the deterministic rules of the game and the AlphaZero RL algorithm, both of
which are simple to describe. Yet the resulting models achieve superhuman performance and are
large in size. To assert that AlphaZero has learned little to no information in this process is clearly
missing the mark, and yet both Shannon and algorithmic information theory appear to say so.

In this paper, we argue that the amount of structural information a computationally bounded
observer can extract from a dataset is a fundamental concept that underlies many observed empirical
phenomena. As we will show, existing notions from Shannon and algorithmic information theory are
inadequate when forced to quantify this type of information. These frameworks often lend intuitive or
mathematical support to beliefs that, in fact, obscure important aspects of empirical phenomena. To
highlight the limitations of classical frameworks and motivate the role of computational constraints
in quantifying information, we identify and demonstrate three apparent paradoxes: statements which
can be justified mathematically by Shannon and algorithmic information theory, and yet are in
tension with intuitions and empirical phenomena.

2

EntropyEpiplexityComputationInformation can be created by computationRandom vs structural informationStructural information  OOD generalizationEntropyEpiplexityEntropyEpiplexityOOD performanceInitialConditionEmergentStructureApparentRandomnessDeterministicDynamicsAPI_KEY = "sk_7aF2jK1ycP9LmvYzz34"USER_ID = "usr_4f8a2c1e9b7d3065"BUCKET = "s3://data-8a3f1b-west-prod"SAVE_DIR = "/mnt/marc/exp_7f2a/ckpts"SAVE_CKPT = TrueDEBUG = FalseSEED = 9284715...High random info, low structural infoLow random info, low structural infodef is_even(n):  if n == 0: return True  elif n == 1: return False  elif n == 2: return True  elif n == 3: return False  elif n == 4: return True  elif n == 5: return False  ...Reuseshared circuits,subprograms,...Moderate random info, high structural infodef dijkstra(g, s):  D = defaultdict(lambda:float('inf'))  D[s] = 0; q = [(0, s)]  while q:    d, u = pop(q)    if d == D[u]:      for v, w in g.get(u, []):        if (nd := d + w) < D[v]:          D[v] = nd; push(q, (nd, v))  return DParadox 1: Information cannot be increased by deterministic processes. For both Shannon
entropy and Kolmogorov complexity, deterministic transformations cannot meaningfully
increase the information content of an object. And yet, we use pseudorandom number
generators to produce randomness, synthetic data improves model capabilities, mathematicians
can derive new knowledge by reasoning from axioms without external information, dynamical
systems produce emergent phenomena, and self-play loops like AlphaZero learn sophisticated
strategies from games (Silver et al., 2018).

Paradox 2: Information is independent of factorization order. A property of both Shannon
entropy and Kolmogorov complexity is that total information content is invariant to factoriza-
tion: the information from observing first X and then Y is the same as observing Y followed
by X. On the other hand, LLMs learn better on English text ordered left-to-right than reverse
ordered text, picking out an “arrow of time” (Papadopoulos et al., 2024; Bengio et al., 2019),
and we have cryptography built on the existence of functions that are computationally hard
to predict in one direction and easy in another.

Paradox 3: Likelihood modeling is merely distribution matching. Maximizing the likelihood
is often equated with matching the training data generating process: the true data-generating
process is a perfect model of itself, and no model can achieve a higher expected likelihood. As
a consequence, it is often assumed that a model trained on a dataset cannot extract more
structure or learn useful features that were not used in generating the data. However, we
show that a computationally-limited observer can in fact uncover much more structure than is
in the data generating process. For example, in Conway’s game of life the data are generated
via simple programmatic rules that operate on two-dimensional arrays of bits. Applying these
simple rules sequentially, we see emergent structures, such as different species of objects that
move and interact in a predictable way. While an unbounded observer can simply simulate
the evolution of the environment exactly, a computationally bounded observer would make
use of the emergent structures and learn the different types of objects and their behaviors.

The tension between these theoretical statements and empirical phenomena can be resolved by impos-
ing computational constraints on the observer and separating the random content from the structural
content. Drawing on ideas from cryptography, algorithmic information theory, and these unexplained
empirical phenomena, we define a new information measure, epiplexity (epistemic complexity),
which formally defines the amount of structural information that a computationally bounded observer
can extract from the data (Section 3, Definition 8). Briefly, epiplexity is the information in the model
that minimizes the description length of data under computational constraints. A simple heuristic
measurement is the area under the loss curve above the final loss, while a more rigorous approach
uses the cumulative KL divergence between a teacher and student model (Section 4, Figure 2).

Our definitions capture the intuition that an object contains both random, inherently unpredictable
information (entropy), and predictable structured information that enables observers to generalize
by identifying patterns (epiplexity). In Figure 1 (left) we illustrate this divide. In the top row, we
have highly redundant and repetitive code and simple color gradients, which have little information
content, be it structural or random. In the middle row, we have the inner workings of an algorithm
and pictures of animals, showing complex, long-range interdependencies between the elements from
which a model can learn complex features and subcircuits that are helpful even for different tasks.
In contrast, on the bottom, we have random data with little structure: configuration files with
randomly generated API keys, file paths, hashes, arbitrary boolean flags have negligible learnable
content and no long-range dependencies or complex circuits that result from learning on this task.
Similarly, uniformly shuffled pixels from the animal pictures have high entropy but are fundamentally
unpredictable, and no complex features or circuits arise from training on these data.

3

An essential property of our formulation is that information is observer dependent: the same
object may appear random or structured depending on the computational resources of the observer.
For instance, the output of a strong pseudorandom generator appears indistinguishable from true
randomness to any polynomial-time observer lacking the secret key (seed), regardless of the algorithm
or function class. In other situations, such as chaotic dynamical systems, both apparently random
behavior is produced along with structure: the state of the system cannot be predicted precisely over
long time-scales, but such observers may still learn meaningful predictive distributions, as shown by
the invariant measure in Figure 1 (top right).

Models trained to represent these distributions are computer programs, and substructures within
these programs, like circuits for performing specific tasks, or induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022),
can be reused even for seemingly unrelated data. This view motivates selecting high epiplexity data
that induces more structural information in the model, since these structures can then be reused for
unseen out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks, as illustrated in Figure 1 (bottom right). We emphasize,
however, that epiplexity is a measure of information, not a guarantee of OOD generalization to
specific tasks. Epiplexity quantifies the amount of structural information a model extracts, while
being agnostic to whether these structures are relevant to a specific downstream task.

To build intuition, we explore a range of phenomena and provide experimental evidence for behaviours
that are poorly accounted for by existing information-theoretic tools, yet naturally accommodated
by epiplexity. We show that information can be created purely through computation, giving insights
into synthetic data (subsection 5.1). We examine how certain factorizations of the same data can
increase structural information and downstream OOD performance—even as they result in worse
training loss (subsection 5.2). We show why likelihood modeling is more than distribution matching,
identifying induction and emergence as two settings where the observer can learn more information
than was present in the data generating process (subsection 5.3). By measuring epiplexity, we can
better understand why pre-training on text data transfers more broadly than image data, and why
certain data selection strategies for LLMs are empirically successful (Section 6). Together, our
results provide clarity on the motivating questions: the information content of data can be compared
independently of a specific task, new information can be created by computation, and models can
learn more information than their generating processes contain.

In short, we identify a disparity between existing concepts in information theory and modern practice,
embodied by three apparent paradoxes, and introduce epiplexity as a measurement of structural
information acquired by a computationally bounded observer to help resolve them. We formally
define epiplexity in Section 3 (Definition 8) and present measurement procedures in Section 4. In
Section 5, we show how epiplexity and time-bounded entropy shed light on these paradoxes, including
induction and emergent phenomena. Finally, in Section 6, we demonstrate that epiplexity correlates
with OOD generalization, helping explain why certain data enable broader generalization than others.

2 Background

In order to define the interesting, structural, and predictive component of information, we must
separate it out from random information—that which is fundamentally unpredictable given the
computational constraints of the observer. Along the way, we will review algorithmic randomness
as developed in algorithmic information theory as well as notions of pseudo-randomness used in
cryptography, and how these concepts crucially depend on the observer.

4

2.1 What Does it Mean for An Object to Be Random?

Random Variables and Shannon Information. Many common intuitions about randomness
start from random variables and Shannon information. A random variable defines a map from a
given measurable probability space to different outcomes, with probabilities corresponding to the
measure of the space that lead to a certain outcome. Shannon information assigns to each outcome
x a self-information (or surprisal) log 1/P (x) based on the probability P , and an entropy for the
random variable H(X) = E[log 1/P (X)], which provides a lower bound on the average code length
needed to communicate samples to another party (Shannon, 1948). In Shannon’s theory, information
comes only from distributions and random variables—objects that are not random must contain no
information. As a result, non-random information is seemingly contradictory, and thus we must draw
from a broader mathematical perspective to describe such concepts.

In the mid 1900s, mathematicians were interested in formalizing precisely what it means for a given
sample to be a random draw from a given distribution, to ground the theory of probability and
random variables (Shafer and Vovk, 2006). A central consideration involves a uniformly sampled
binary sequence u1:∞ from which other distributions of interest can be constructed. This sequence
can also be interpreted as the binary expression of a number [0, 1). Intuitively, one might think that
all sequences should be regarded as equally random, as they are all equally likely according to the
probability distribution: 1111111 . . . has the same probability mass as 10011101 . . . and also the same
self-information. However, looking at statistics on these sequences reveals something missing from this
perspective; from the law of large numbers, for example, it must be that limN→∞
i=1 ui = 0.5,
which is clearly not satisfied by the first sequence of 1s.

(cid:80)N

1
N

Martin-Löf Randomness: No algorithm exists to predict the sequence. Initial attempts
were made to formalize randomness as sequences which pass all statistical tests for randomness, such
as the law of large numbers for selected substrings. However, under such definitions all sequences
fail to be random since tests like u1:∞ ̸= y1:∞ for any particular sequence y must also be included
(Downey and Hirschfeldt, 2019). The solution to these issues was found by defining random sequences
not as those that pass all tests of randomness, but those that pass all computable tests of randomness,
in a formalization known as Martin-Löf randomness (Martin-Löf, 1966). As it turned out, this
definition is equivalent to a number of seemingly distinct definitions, such as the inability for any
gambler to exploit properties of the sequence to make a profit, or that all prefixes of the random
sequence should be nearly incompressible (Terwijn, 2016). For this last definition, we must invoke
Kolmogorov complexity, a notion of compressibility and a key concept in this paper.

Definition 1 (Prefix Kolmogorov complexity (Kolmogorov, 1968; Chaitin, 1975)) Fix a
universal prefix-free Turing machine U. The (prefix) Kolmogorov complexity of a finite binary string
x is K(x) = min{ |p|: U(p) = x }. That is, K(x) is the length of the shortest self-delimiting program
(a program which also encodes its length) that outputs x and halts. The conditional complexity K(x|y)
is the length of the shortest program that outputs x and halts when provided y as input.

Due to the universality of Turing machines, the Kolmogorov complexity for two Turing machines (or
programming languages) U1 and U2 differ by at most a constant, |KU1(x) − KU2(x)|≤ C, where the
constant C depends only on U1, U2, but not on x (Li et al., 2008).

Definition 2 (Martin–Löf random sequence (Martin-Löf, 1966)) An infinite sequence
x1:∞ ∈ {0, 1}N is Martin–Löf random iff there exists a constant c such that for all n, K(x1:n) ≥ n−c.
Using this criterion, all computable randomness tests are condensed into a single incomputable
randomness test concerning Kolmogorov complexity.

5

One can extend Martin-Löf randomness to finite sequences. We say that a sequence x ∈ {0, 1}n is
c-random if K(x) > n − c. Equivalently, randomness discrepancy is defined as δ(x) = n − K(x),
which measures how far away x is from having maximum Kolmogorov complexity. A sequence x
is c-random if δ(x) < c. High Kolmogorov complexity, low randomness discrepancy, sequences are
overwhelmingly likely when sampled from uniform randomly sampled random variables. From Kraft’s
inequality (Kraft, 1949; McMillan, 1956), there are at most 2n−c (prefix-free) programs of length
L ≤ n − c, therefore in the 2n possibilities in uniformly sampling X ∼ Un, the probability that K(X)
is size L or smaller is P (K(X) ≤ n − c) = P (δ(X) ≥ c) < 2−c. The randomness discrepancy of
a sequence can thus be viewed as a test statistic for rejecting the null hypothesis that the object
X was indeed sampled uniformly at random (Grünwald et al., 2008). For a sequence to have low
randomness discrepancy, it must exhibit no discernible pattern, and thus there is an objective sense
in which 1001011100 is more random than 0101010101.
Given the Martin-Löf definition of infinite random sequences, every random sequence is incomputable;
in other words, there is no program that can implement the function N → {0, 1} which produces the
bits of the sequence. One should contrast such random numbers from those like π/4 or e/3, which
though transcendental, are computable, as there exist programs that can compute the bits of their
binary expressions. While the computable numbers in [0, 1) form a countable set, algorithmically
random numbers in [0, 1) are uncountably large in number. With the incomputability of random
sequences in mind we can appreciate the Von Neumann quote

“Anyone who considers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is, of course, in
a state of sin.” (Von Neumann, 1951)

which anticipates the Martin–Löf formalization that came later. But this viewpoint also misses some-
thing essential, as evidenced by the success of pseudorandom number generation, derandomization,
and cryptography.

Cryptographic Randomness: No polynomial time algorithm exists to predict the se-
quence. An important practical and theoretical development of random numbers has come from the
cryptography community, by once again limiting the computational model of the observer.

Rather than passing all computable tests as with Martin-Löf randomness, cryptographically secure
pseudorandom number generators (CSPRNG or PRG) are defined as functions which produce
sequences that pass all polynomial time tests of randomness. Such functions are conjectured to be
constructible by computer programs and are central to cryptographic research.

Definition 3 (Non-uniform PRG (Blum and Micali, 1982; Goldreich, 2006)) A function G
stretching k input bits into n output bits is a pseudorandom generator (PRG) if its outputs cannot
be distinguished from a random sequence by any polynomial time algorithm more than a negligible
fraction of the time. More precisely, G is a (non-uniform) PRG iff for every non-uniform probabilistic
polynomial time algorithm Dk : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} (making use of advice strings {ak}k∈N of length
poly(k)) has at most negligible advantage ϵ(k) distinguishing outputs of G from uniformly random
sequences u ∼ Un:

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
Pr
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
s∼Uk

[Dn(G(s)) = 1] − Pr
u∼Un

[Dn(u) = 1]

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

= ϵ(k) < negl(k) .1

(1)

The definition of indistinguishability via polynomial time tests is equivalent to a definition on the
failure to predict the next element of a sequence given the previous elements: no polynomial time

1. Here negl(k) means that the function decays faster than the reciprocal of any polynomial, i.e., negl(k) <

integers c > 0 and sufficiently large k.

1
kc

for all

6

predictor can predict the next bit of the sequence with probability negligibly better than random
guessing (Yao, 1982).

Following from the indistinguishability definition, randomness of this kind can be substituted for
Martin-Löf randomness in the vast majority of practical circumstances.2 For a concrete example, if a
use-case of randomness that runs in polynomial time like quicksort, and takes more iterations to
run with PRG sequences than with truly random sequences, and this difference could be determined
within polynomial time such as by measuring the quicksort runtime, then this construction could be
used as a polynomial time distinguisher, which by the definition of PRG does not exist. If PRGs
exist, then quicksort must run nearly as fast using pseudorandom number generation as it does with
truly random sequences.

The existence of PRGs hinges on the existence of one way functions (OWF), from which PRGs and
other cryptographic primitives are constructed, forming the basis of modern cryptography (Goldreich
and Levin, 1989). For example, the backbone algorithm for parallel random number generation in
Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018), works to create random numbers u1, u2, . . . uN by simply encrypting
the numbers 1, 2, . . . , N : uk = E(k, s) where the encryption key s is the random seed and E is the
threefish block cypher (Salmon et al., 2011). Block ciphers, like other primitives, are constructed
using one way functions.

Definition 4 (Non-uniform one-way function, OWF (Yao, 1982; Goldreich, 2006)) Let f :
{0, 1}n → {0, 1}m (with m > n) be computable in time poly(n) where n = |x|. We say f is one-way
against non-uniform PPT adversaries if for every non-uniform probabilistic polynomial time algorithm
An (i.e., a polynomial-time algorithm A with advice strings {an}n∈N of length poly(n)),

(cid:2) An(f (x)) ∈ f −1(f (x)) (cid:3) < negl(n),

Pr
x∼Un

where the probability is over the uniform choice of x (and any internal randomness in A).

While cryptographers are most interested in the polynomial versus nonpolynomial compute separations
for security, cryptographic primitives with respect to less extreme compute separations have been
constructed and are believed to exist, for example for quadratic time (Merkle, 1978), quasipolynomial
time (Liu and Pass, 2024), and even constraints on circuit depth (Applebaum, 2016). While the results
we prove in this paper are based on the polynomial vs nonpolynomial separation in cryptographic
primitives, it seems likely that a much wider array of compute separations are relevant for information
in the machine learning context even if not as important for cryptography. For example, the
separations between quadratic or cubic time and higher order polynomials may be relevant to
transformer self attention, or gaps between fixed circuit depth and variable depth as made possible
with chain of thought or other mechanisms.

2.2 Random vs Structural Information

With these notions of randomness in hand, we can use what is random to define what is not random.
In algorithmic information theory, there is a lesser known concept that captures exactly this idea,
known as sophistication (Koppel, 1988), which has no direct analog in Shannon information theory.
While several variants of the definition exist, the most straightforward is perhaps the following:

Definition 5 (Naive Sophistication (Mota et al., 2013)) Sophistication, like Kolmogorov com-
plexity, is defined on individual bitstrings, and it uses the compressibility criterion from Martin-Löf

2. Specifically, when the difference between outcomes can be measured in polynomial time.

7

randomness to carve out the random content of the bitstring. Sophistication is defined as the smallest
Kolmogorov complexity of a set S such that x is a random element from that set (at randomness
discrepancy of c).

nsophc(x) = min

S

: {K(S) : K(x | S) > log|S|−c}

(2)

Informally, sophistication describes the structural component of an object; however, it is surprisingly
difficult to give concrete examples of high sophistication objects. The difficulty of finding high
sophistication objects is a consequence of Chaitin’s incompleteness theorem (Chaitin, 1974). This
theorem states that in a given formal system there is a constant L for which there are no proofs that
any specific string x has K(x) > L, even though nearly all strings have nearly maximal complexity.
Since nsophc(x) > L implies K(x) > L − O(1), there can be no proofs that the sophistication of a
particular string exceeds a certain constant either. It is known that high sophistication strings exist
by a diagonalization argument (Antunes et al., 2005), but we cannot pinpoint any specific strings
which have high sophistication. On typical Turing machines, L is often not more than a few thousand
(Chaitin, 1998), far from the terabytes of information that frontier AI models have encoded.

We look towards complex systems and behaviors as likely examples of high sophistication objects;
however in many of these cases the objects could conceivably be produced by simpler descriptions
given tremendous amounts of computation. The mixing of two fluids for example can produce
extremely complex transient behavior due to the complexities of fluid dynamics; however, with access
to unlimited computation and some appropriately chosen random initial data one should be able to
reproduce the exact dynamics (Aaronson et al., 2014). Owing to the unbounded compute available
for the programs in sophistication, many complex objects lose their complexity. Additionally, for
strings that do have high sophistication, the steps of computation required for the optimal program
grow faster than any computable function with the sophistication content (Ay et al., 2010). For
a computationally bounded observer, an encrypted message or a cryptographically secure pseudo-
random number generator (CSPRNG) output is random, and measurements that do not recognize
this randomness do not reflect the circumstances of this observer. These limitations of sophistication
leads to a disconnect with real systems with observers that have limited computation, and it is
our contention that this disconnect is an essential one, central to phenomena such as emergence,
induction, chaos, and cryptography.

2.3 The Minimum Description Length Principle

Finally, we review the minimum description length principle (MDL), used as a theoretical criterion
for model selection, which we will use in defining epiplexity. The principle states that among models
for the data, the best explanation minimizes the total description length of the data, including both
the description of the data using the model and the description of the model itself (Rissanen, 2004).
The most common instantiation of this idea is via the statistical two-part code MDL.

Definition 6 (Two-part MDL (Rissanen, 2004; Grünwald, 2007)) Let x ∈ {0, 1}n×d be the
data and H be a set of candidate models. The two-part MDL is:

L(x) = min
H∈H

L(H) − log P (x | H),

where L(H) specifies the number of bits required to encode the model H, and − log P (x | H) is the
number of bits required to encode the data given the model.

This formulation provides an intuitive implementation of Occam’s Razor: complex models (large
L(H)) are penalized unless they provide a reduction in the data’s description length (large P (x | H)).

8

If there are repeating patterns in the data, they can be stored in the model H rather than being
duplicated in the code for the data. We review the modern developments of MDL in Appendix H.
While MDL is a criterion for model selection given a fixed dataset, epiplexity, which we introduce
next, can be viewed as its dual: a criterion for data selection given a fixed computation budget.

3 Epiplexity: Structural Information Extractable by a Computationally

Bounded Observer

Keeping in mind the distinction between structural and random information in the unbounded
compute setting, and the computational nature of pseudorandomness in cryptography, we now
introduce epiplexity. Epiplexity captures the structural information present to a computationally
bounded observer. As the computational constraints of this observer change, so too does the division
between random and structured content. After introducing epiplexity here, we present ways of
measuring epiplexity in Section 4. In Sections 5 and 6 we show how epiplexity can shed light on
seeming paradoxes in information theory around the value of data, and OOD generalization.

First we will define what it means for a probability distribution to have an efficient implementation,
requiring that it be implemented on a prefix-free universal Turing machine (UTM) and halt in a
fixed number of steps.

Definition 7 (Time-bounded probabilistic model) Let T : N → N be a non-decreasing time-
constructible function and let U be a fixed prefix-free universal Turing machine. A (prefix-free)
program P is a T -time probabilistic model over {0, 1}n if it supports both sampling and probability
evaluation in time T (n):

Evaluation. On input (0, x) with x ∈ {0, 1}n, U(P, (0, x)) halts within T (n) steps and outputs an
element in [0, 1] (with a finite binary expansion), denoted

ProbP(x) := U(P, (0, x)).

Sampling. On input (1, u) where u ∈ {0, 1}∞ is an infinite random tape, U(P, (1, u)) halts within
T (n) steps and outputs an element of {0, 1}n, denoted

SampleP(u) := U(P, (1, u)).

These outputs must define a normalized distribution matching the sampler:

(cid:88)

x∈{0,1}n

ProbP(x) = 1

and

Pr
u∼U∞

[SampleP(u) = x] = ProbP(x) ∀x ∈ {0, 1}n.

Let PT be the set of all such programs. To simplify the notation, we will use italicized P to denote
the probability mass function ProbP in contrast with the non-italicized P, which denotes the program.

Here, n denotes the dimension of the underlying sample space (e.g., the length of the binary string.)
This definition allows us to constrain the amount of computation the function class can use. Such a
model class enforces that the functions of interest are both efficiently sampleable and evaluable, which
include most sequence models. While in this work we focus primarily on computational constraints
which we consider most fundamental, other constraints such as memory or within a given function
class F can be accommodated by replacing PT with PF , and may be important for understanding

9

particular phenomena.3 With these preliminaries in place, we can now separate the random and
structural components of information.

We define epiplexity and time-bounded entropy in terms of the program which achieves the best
expected compression of the random variable X, minimizing the two-part code length (model and
data given model bits) under the given runtime constraint.

Definition 8 (Epiplexity and Time-Bounded Entropy) Consider a random variable X
on {0, 1}n. Let

P⋆ = arg min

{|P|+E[log 1/P (X)]}

P∈PT

(3)

be the program that minimizes the time bounded MDL with ties broken by the smallest program,
and expectations taken over X. |P| denotes the length of the program P in bits, and logarithms
are in base 2. We define the T -bounded epiplexity ST and entropy HT of the random variable
X as

ST (X) := |P⋆|,

and HT (X) := E[log 1/P ⋆(X)].

(4)

The time-bounded entropy HT captures the amount of information in the random variable that
is random and unpredictable, whereas the epiplexity ST captures the amount of structure and
regularity visible within the object at the given level of compute T . Uniform random variables
have trivial epiplexity because a model (or equivalently a program) as simple as the uniform
distribution achieves a small two-part code length, despite having large time-bounded entropy.
Explicitly, for a uniform random variable Un on {0, 1}n, and even a constant time bound T (n) ≥ c1,
ST (Un) + HT (Un) ≤ n + c2 where c2 is the length of a program for the uniform distribution running
in time c1, and since HT (Un) ≥ H(Un) = n, it must be that ST (Un) ≤ c2. Random variables with
simple patterns, like 0101010101... with probability 1/2 and 1010101010... with probability 1/2, also
have low epiplexity because the time bounded MDL minimal model is simple. In this case with
linear time T (n) = Θ(n), both ST (X) = O(1) and HT (X) = O(1). Henceforth, we will abbreviate
MDLT (X) := ST (X) + HT (X), which is the total time-bounded information content. We will now
enumerate a few basic consequences of these definitions.

Basic Properties

(1) ST (X) ≥ 0, HT (X) ≥ 0,
(2) H(X) ≤ ST (X) + HT (X) ≤ n + c1,
(3) MDLT ′(X) ≤ MDLT (X) whenever T ′(n) ≥ T (n),
(4) MDLT ′(f −1(X)) ≤ MDLT (X) + |f|+c2, with T ′(n) = T (n) + Time(f).

Statement 4 (defined for programs f that run in a fixed time implementing a bijection) is an analog
of the information non-increase property K(f (x)) ≤ K(x) + K(f ) + c. However, note that while the
Kolmogorov complexity for K(f ) and K(f −1) are the same to within an additive constant, in our
setting of a fixed computational budget having a short program for f −1 does not imply one for f ,

3. One such possibility is to constrain the function class to all models reachable by a given optimization procedure

with a given neural network architecture.

10

and vice versa. This gap between a function and its inverse has important consequences for the three
paradoxes as we will see in Section 5.

Pseudorandom number sequences have high random content and little structure. Unlike
Shannon entropy, Kolmogorov complexity, or even resource bounded forms of Kolmogorov complexity
(Allender et al., 2011), we show that CSPRNGs have nearly maximal time-bounded entropy for
polynomial time observers. Additionally, while CSPRNGs produce random content, they do not
produce structured content as the epiplexity is negligibly larger than constant. Formally, let Uk be
the uniform distribution on k bits.

Theorem 9 For any G ∈ PRG that stretches the input to n = poly(k) bits and allowing for
an advantage of at most ε(k), the polynomial time bounded entropy is nearly maximal:

n − 2 − nε(k) < HPoly(G(Uk)) ≤ n + c

for a fixed constant c, and epiplexity is nearly constant

SPoly(G(Uk)) ≤ c + nε(k).

Proof: see Appendix A.1.

In contrast, the Shannon entropy is H(G(Uk)) = k, polynomial time bounded Kolmogorov complexity
will be at most k + c (assuming n is fixed or specified ahead of time) as there is a short and efficiently
runnable program G which produces the output, and similarly with other notions such as Levin
complexity (Li and Vitányi, 2008) or time bounded Kolmogorov complexity (Allender et al., 2011).
Taken together, these results show that epiplexity appropriately characterizes pseudorandom numbers
as carrying a large amount of time-bounded randomness but essentially no learnable structure, exactly
as intuition suggests.

Existence of Random Variables with High Epiplexity. One may wonder whether any high
epiplexity random variables exist at all. Indeed, assuming the existence of one-way functions, we
can show via a counting argument that there exists a sequence of random variables whose epiplexity
grows at least logarithmically with the dimension.

Theorem 10 Assuming the existence of one-way functions secure against non-uniform prob-
abilistic polynomial-time adversaries, there exists a sequence of random variables {Xn}∞
over {0, 1}n such that

n=1

SPoly(Xn) = Ω(log n).

Proof: see Appendix A.4.

This result implies that epiplexity can be unbounded; however, logarithmically growing information
content only admits a very modest amount of structural information, still far from the power law
scaling we see with some natural data. We also note that the argument is nonconstructive and hence
does not compromise cryptographic security.

Conditional Entropy and Epiplexity. To describe situations like image classification, where we
are only interested in a function which predicts the label from the image, and not the information in
generating the images, we define conditional time-bounded entropy and epiplexity.

11

Definition 11 (Conditional epiplexity and time-bounded entropy) For a pair of random
variables X and Y , define P X
T (n) as the set of probabilistic models P such that for each fixed x,
the conditional model PY |x is in PT (n). The optimal conditional model with access to X is:

P⋆

Y |X = arg min
P∈P X
T

(cid:8)|P|+E(X,Y ) [− log P (Y | X)](cid:9) .

The conditional epiplexity and time-bounded entropy are defined as:

ST (Y | X) :=

(cid:12)
(cid:12)P⋆
(cid:12)

Y |X

(cid:12)
(cid:12) , HT (Y | X) := E(X,Y )
(cid:12)

(cid:104)
− log P ⋆

Y |X (y | x)

(cid:105)

.

(5)

(6)

These quantities are defined with respect to the time bounded MDL over programs which take as input
X, Y and output the probabilities over Y (conditioned on X), and with expectations taken over both
X and Y . We note that in general this definition is not equivalent to the difference of the joint and
individual entropies, HT (Y, X) − HT (X) ̸= HT (Y |X). Unlike Shannon entropy, we can also condition
on deterministic strings, which will change the values on account of not needing such a large program
P. For example, we may be interested in the conditional epiplexity ST (X|m) or entropy HT (X|m)
given a model m. For a deterministic string d ∈ {0, 1}∗ we define the conditional epiplexity via

P⋆

Y |d = min

P∈P {0,1}∗

T

{|P|+EY [− log P (Y | d)]} ,

(7)

where the minimization is over time bounded functions P (· | ·) that take in the string d as the second
argument (which we refer to as P {0,1}∗

).

T

For the machine learning setting, we take the random variable X to refer to the entire dataset of
interest, i.e. typically a collection X = [X1, X2, . . . ] of many iid samples from a given distribution,
rather than a lone sample from, and E[log 1/P (X)] scales with the dataset size. Epiplexity typically
grows with the size of the dataset (see detailed arguments for why this is the case in Section B.4)
as larger datasets allow identifying and extracting more intricate structure and patterns, mirroring
the practice of ML training. Moreover, as we will see later, the epiplexity of a typical dataset is
orders of magnitudes smaller than the random information content. While not a focus of this paper,
conditioning on deterministic strings opens up the possibility to understand what additional data is
most useful for a specific machine learning model, such as on top of a pretrained LLM.

4 Measuring Epiplexity and Time-Bounded Entropy

We have now introduced epiplexity and time-bounded entropy as measures of structural and random
information of the data. In this section, we present practical procedures to estimate upper bounds
and empirical proxies for these quantities. Intuitively, we want to find a probabilistic model P (·) of
the data X that achieves low expected loss E[log 1/P (X)], is described by a short program P, and
evaluating P (X) takes time at most T (|X|), which we will abbreviate as T. Using this model, we
thereby decompose the information of the data into its structural and random components, namely,
(1) epiplexity ST (X): the length of the program |P|, accounting for the bits required to model the
data distribution, and (2) time-bounded entropy HT (X): the expected length for entropy coding the
data using this model, which accounts for the bits required to specify the particular realization of X
within that distribution. We estimate conditional epiplexity analogously, providing random variable
conditioning as input into the model.

Since directly searching over the space of programs is intractable, we restrict attention to probabilistic
models parameterized by neural networks, as they achieve strong empirical compression across data

12

(a) Estimate information in model

(b) Compute-optimal 2-part code

(c) Requential vs Prequential

Figure 2: How to estimate epiplexity. (a) We consider two approaches for efficiently coding trained
neural networks. Prequential estimation estimates information content as the area under the loss curve of
a model above its final loss, with the training set matching the test data distribution. Requential coding,
which provides an explicit code for P s with expected length as the cumulative KL between a student model
P s and the teacher P t that generates its synthetic training data, visualized approximately by their loss gap.
We typically choose P t to be a model trained on the real training set, as in prequential coding. (b) Using
either approach, we optimize hyperparameters (model size N , training tokens D, etc.) to find the shortest
two-part code for each compute budget, which decomposes into the estimated epiplexity and time-bounded
entropy. (c) Comparing prequential and requential coding on four groups of datsets used in this work. The
prequential estimate is typically larger, but the two correlate well, particularly within each group.

modalities (MacKay, 2003; Goldblum et al., 2023; Delétang et al., 2023; Ballé et al., 2018) and
capture the most relevant ML phenomenology. While a naive approach is to let P be a program that
directly stores the architecture and weights of a neural network and evaluates it on the given data,
this approach can significantly overestimate the information content in the weights, particularly for
large models trained on relatively little data. Instead, we will use a more efficient approach that
encodes the training process that produces the weights. We will discuss two approaches for encoding
neural network training processes, based on prequential coding (Dawid, 1984) and requential coding
(Finzi et al., 2026), respectively. The former is more straightforward to understand and evaluate, but
relies on a heuristic argument to separate structure bits from noise bits, while the latter is rigorous
at the cost of being more difficult to evaluate. Fortunately, both approaches often yield comparable
rankings of epiplexity across datasets (Section 4.3).

Moving forward, we will measure time by the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) and
dataset size by number of tokens, so that training a model with N parameters on D tokens takes time
approximately 6N D (Kaplan et al., 2020), while evaluating it on X takes time 2N D with D = |X|
the number of tokens in X. To distinguish X from the training dataset, which we are free to choose,
we will refer to X as the test dataset, as it is the data we need to perform inference on.

4.1 Approximating Model Description Length with Prequential Coding

Prequential coding provides a classic approach for compressing the training process of a neural
network. We assume a batch size of one for simplicity, but generalizing to batch sizes larger than one
is straightforward. Starting with a randomly initialized network P0 (where the subscript indicates
timestep), we proceed iteratively: at each step i, we entropy encode the current training token Zi
using log 1/Pi(Zi) bits, then train the model on this token to produce Pi+1. Typically Zi’s are drawn
i.i.d. from the same distribution as X. On the side of the decoder, a synchronized model is maintained;
the model decodes Zi using Pi and then trains on it to produce the identical Pi+1. Omitting small
constant overheads for specifying the random initialization, architecture, and training algorithm,
a total of L(Z:M , PM ) = (cid:80)M −1
i=0 log 1/Pi(Zi) bits yields an explicit code for both the training data
Z:M = {Z0, . . . , ZM −1} and the final model weights PM , which can be decoded in time 6N D for a

13

# Train TokensTrain NLLlog1/PtD(Z0,,ZD1)log1/Pti(Zi)log1/Psi(Zi)|Ppreq||Preq|Compute (T=6ND+2N)|P|+Elog1/P(X)HT(X)=Elog1/P*(X)ST(X)=|P*|# Params (N)0.00.51.00.02.55.0ECA0.10.50.9456Induct Easy0.500.751.00456Induct Hard103050105090NaturalSpreq (MB)Sreq (MB)model with N parameters trained on D tokens (typically D > M as each example contains multiple
tokens). Despite having an explicit code for Z, PM , we cannot easily separate this into a code for
PM alone for estimating epiplexity.
To isolate the description length of PM alone, we adopt the heuristic in Zhang et al. (2020) and
Finzi et al. (2025): we first estimate the description length of the training data given PM as its
entropy code length under the final model, L(Z:M |PM ) = (cid:80)M −1
i=0 log 1/PM (Zi). Then, appealing
to the symmetry of information, which states K(PM ) = K(Z:M , PM ) − K(Z:M |PM ) up to constant
terms, we estimate the description length of PM as the difference L(Z:M , PM ) − L(Z:M |PM ):

|Ppreq| ≈

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

(log 1/Pi(Zi) − log 1/PM (Zi)).

(8)

If Zi is sampled i.i.d., as is typically the case, then the code length for the model can be visualized
as the area under the loss curve above the final loss in Figure 2a. Intuitively, the model absorbs
a significant amount of information from the data if training yields a sustained and substantial
reduction in loss. For random data, log 1/Pi(Zi) never decreases, while for simple data, log 1/Pi(Zi)
drops rapidly and stabilizes, both leading to small |Ppreq|. We note that the prequential loss values
are effectively taken on estimates of the test loss, because they evaluate the log probabilities on a
batch before it is trained on, a central detail to the coding scheme. In cases where train and test
diverge, such as when there is overfitting, this difference could become important important.

Encoding the test dataset X (not to be confused with the training data) using this model, we obtain
a two-part code of expected length |Ppreq|+E[log 1/PM (X)] that runs in time 6N D + 2N D. We
optimize the training hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate) and the trade-off between N and D
subject to the time bound 6N D + 2N D ≤ T to find the optimal P ⋆ that minimizes the two-part
code within this family, and estimate epiplexity and time-bounded entropy as ST (X) = |P⋆
preq| and
HT (X) = E[log 1/P ⋆(X)]. The better these hyperparameters are optimized, the more accurate our
estimates become. We use the Maximal Update Parameterization (µP) (Yang et al., 2022) to ensure
the optimal learning rate and initialization are consistent across model sizes, simplifying tuning. We
estimate the expectation E[log 1/PM (X)] by its empirical value on held-out validation data, i.e., the
validation loss scaled by the size of X. We detail the full procedure in Section B, such as how we
choose the hyperparameters and estimate the Pareto frontier of MDL vs compute.

While conceptually simple, practically useful, and easy to evaluate, this prequential approach to
approximating epiplexity is not rigorous for two reasons. First, both L(Z:M , PM ) and L(Z:M |PM )
can only upper-bound the respective Kolmogorov complexities, and thus their difference does not
yield an upper bound for K(PM ).4 Second, even setting this issue aside, the argument only establishes
the existence of a program that encodes PM with length |Ppreq|, but does not guarantee that its
runtime falls within 6N D, since the symmetry of information does not extend to time-bounded
Kolmogorov complexity. Nevertheless, prequential coding can serve as a useful starting point for
crudely estimating epiplexity, particularly convenient when one already has access to the loss curve
from an existing training run.

4.2 Explicitly Coding the Model with Requential Coding

To address the shortcomings of the previous approach based on prequential coding, we adopt
requential coding (Finzi et al., 2026) for constructing an explicit code of the model with a known
runtime. Rather than trying to code a particular training dataset, with requential coding one can
use the insensitivity to the exact data points sampled to code for a sampled dataset that leads

4. We have L(Z:M , PM ) + O(1) ≥ K(Z:M , PM ), but not that L(Z:M |PM ) + O(1) ≤ K(Z:M |PM ).

14

to a performant model but without paying for the entropy of the data. Specifically, it encodes a
is trained on a synthetic token sampled randomly
training run where at step i a student model P s
i
from a teacher model P t
are arbitrary teacher model checkpoints.
, where the sequence P t
0 , . . . , P t
i
to be the checkpoints from training on the original real training set, as in
We typically choose P t
i
prequential coding. Using relative entropy coding (Theis and Ahmed, 2022), the synthetic tokens
(synchronized between encoder and decoder) using
can be coded given only the student P s
(cid:101)Zi ∼ P t
i
i
i )) + 4 bits in expectation. Summing over all steps gives the requential
i ) + log(1 + KL(P t
KL(P t
i ∥P s
i ∥P s
:
code length for P s
M

M −1

|Preq| =

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

KL(P t

i ∥P s

i ) + log(1 + KL(P t

i ∥P s

i )) + 4 + O(1) ≈

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

KL(P t

i ∥P s

i ),

(9)

where the logarithmic and constant overheads are typically negligible due to large sequence length
and batch size, and as before we omit the small constant cost of specifying the random initialization,
architecture, and training algorithm. In addition to providing an explicit code, a key advantage of
that
requential coding is its flexibility in choosing the teacher sequence: by selecting teachers P t
i
remain close to the student P s
while still pointing toward the target distribution, we keep the per-step
i
i ) small while effectively guiding the student’s learning.
coding cost KL(P t
Figure 2a connects requential coding to the student’s and teacher’s loss curves: suppose we take as
from a model trained on real data Z0, . . . , ZM −2 ∼ PX . For
teachers the checkpoints P t
visualization, we can then estimate KL(P t
i (Zi), which is
i ) by the loss gap log 1/P s
i ∥P s
accurate when P t
i ≈ PX . We can thus visualize the code length for the student as approximately the
area between the teacher’s and student’s loss curves on real data, as shown in Figure 2a.

i (Zi) − log 1/P t

0 , . . . , P t

i ∥P s

M −1

The two-part code has expected length |Preq|+E[log 1/P s
by
replaying the training process, which takes time 6N D for a total of D requential training tokens, and
then evaluating P s
on the test dataset X, taking an additional time 2N D, for a total runtime of
M
6N D + 2N D. We optimize the training hyperparameters, teacher choices, and the trade-off between
N and D subject to the specified time bound T to find the optimal model P ⋆ minimizing the two-part
code, and estimate ST (X) = |P⋆

req| and HT (X) = E[log 1/P ⋆(X)]. See details in Section B.1.

M (X)], consisting of first decoding P s

M

4.3 Comparison Between the Two Approaches and Practical Recommendations

Figure 2c compares the estimated epiplexity obtained by the two approaches across four groups
of datasets used in this work: ECA (Section 5.1), easy and hard induction (Section 5.3.1), and
natural datasets (Section 6.2). While the prequential estimate is typically several times larger than
the requential estimate, the two estimates correlate well, particularly within each group where
the datasets yield similar learning dynamics. We detail the datasets and time bounds used in
Section C.7. This general agreement is expected since the prequential estimate can be viewed as
an approximation of requential coding with a static teacher (Section B.2). In general, however, the
discrepancy between the two estimates will depend on particular datasets and training configurations,
and a good correlation between the two is not guaranteed.

While requential coding is the more rigorous approach, it is typically 2× to 10× slower than prequential
coding, which requires only standard training. The overhead depends on batch size, sequence length,
and inference implementation (smaller overhead for large batches and short sequences), as requential
coding requires repeatedly sampling from the teacher, though it is possible that the overhead can
be reduced with more efficient algorithms. Therefore, we recommend using prequential coding for
crudely estimating epiplexity and ranking the epiplexity of different datasets, particularly when
one has access to the loss curve from an existing expensive training run (e.g., see an application in
Section 6.2), and requential coding for obtaining the most accurate estimates otherwise.

15

4.4 How Epiplexity and Time-Bounded Entropy Scale with Compute and Data

Under natural assumptions about neural network training—namely, that larger models are more
sample-efficient and that there are diminishing returns to scaling model size or data alone—we expect
epiplexity and time-bounded entropy to exhibit certain generic scaling behavior as a function of
the compute budget T and dataset size D. In Section B.4, we show that, under these assumptions,
the compute-optimal model size N ⋆(T ) and training data size D⋆(T ) are generally increasing in the
compute budget T , which implies that epiplexity ST (X) typically grows with T while time-bounded
entropy HT (X) decreases. In the infinite-compute limit, epiplexity S∞(X) typically grows with the
test set size D = |X|, while the per-token time-bounded entropy H∞(X)/D decreases. These results
align with our intuition that larger compute budgets and more data allow the model to extract more
structural information from the dataset and reduce the apparent randomness remaining in each
sample. However, they should be understood only as typical trends, with a counterexample shown in
Section 5.3.2 relating to the phenomenon of emergence.

5 Three Apparent Paradoxes of Information

To illustrate the lacunae in existing information theory perspectives, we highlight three apparent
paradoxes of information: (1) information cannot be created by deterministic transformations; (2)
total information content of an object is the same regardless of the factorization; and (3) likelihood
modeling can only learn to match the data-generating process. Each statement captures some existing
sentiment within the machine learning community, can be justified mathematically by Shannon and
algorithmic information theory, and yet seems to be in conflict with intuitions and experimental
observations. In this section, we will show with both theoretical results and empirical evidence that
time bounding and epiplexity help resolve these apparent paradoxes.

5.1 Paradox 1: Information Cannot be Created by Deterministic Transformations

Both Shannon and algorithmic information theory state in some form that the total information
cannot be increased by applying deterministic transformations on existing data. The data processing
inequality (DPI) states that if some information source W produces natural data X that are collected,
then no deterministic or stochastic transformations used to produce Y from X can increase the
mutual information with the variable of interest W : I(Y ; W ) ≤ I(X; W ). Similarly, information
non-increase states that a deterministic transformation f can only preserve or decrease the Shannon
information, a property that holds pointwise − log PY (f (x)) ≤ − log PX (x) and in expectation:
H(f (X)) ≤ H(X) (we note X here is a discrete random variable). In algorithmic information theory,
there is a corresponding property: K(f (x)) ≤ K(x) + K(f ) + c for a fixed constant c. These
inequalities appear to rule out creating new information with deterministic computational processes.

How can we reconcile this fact with algorithms like AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018) that can be run in
a closed environment from a small deterministic program on the game of chess, extracting insights
about the game, different openings, the relative values of pieces in different positions, tactics and
high level strategy, and requiring megabytes of information stored in the weights? Similarly we have
dynamical systems with simple descriptions of the underlying laws that produce rich and unexpected
structures, from which we can learn new things about them and mathematics.

We also have evidence that synthetic data is helpful for model capabilities (Liu et al., 2024; Gerstgrasser
et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2025). Moreover, if we believe that the processes that
create natural data could in principle have been simulated to sufficient precision on a large computer,
then all data could have been equivalently replaced with synthetic data. For practical synthetic

16

Figure 3:
Information created with cellular automata. (Left) Example rollouts from random initial
conditions of the class II rule 15, class III rule 30, and class IV rule 54. Time flows from up to down.
(Right) Measuring epiplexity on data produced by these transformations, we see that rule 15 produces little
information (low HT , low ST ), rule 30 produces lots of unpredictable random information (high HT , low ST ),
and rule 54 produces both random and structural information (medium HT , high ST ). These observations
are reflected in the training loss curve of LLMs, which saturates quickly for rule 15, makes no progress for
rule 30, and makes continued progress with compute for rule 54.

data produced from transformations of samples from a given model and prompt, this sampling is
performed with pseudorandom number generators, making the entire transformation deterministic.
If we consider f as the transformations we use to produce synthetic data and x was the limited real
data we started with, these inequalities appear to state very concretely that our synthetic data adds
no additional information beyond the model and training data.

Whatever information it is that we mean when we say that AlphaZero has produced new and
unexpected insights in chess, or new theoretical results in mathematics, or with synthetic data, it is
not Shannon or algorithmic information. We argue that these unintuitive properties of information
theory are a consequence of assuming unlimited computation for the observer. With limited
computation, a description of the AlphaZero algorithm and the result of running AlphaZero for
thousands of TPU hours are distinct. To build intuition, we start with the humble CSPRNG which
also creates time-bounded information through computation (albeit random information).

Theorem 12 Let G : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}n be a PRG which admits advantage ε(k) and Uk be
the uniform distribution. HPoly(G(Uk)) − HPoly(Uk) > n − k − nε(k) − c for a fixed constant c.
Proof: see Appendix A.2.

Notably, we have a deterministic function which dramatically increases the time-bounded information
content of the input. It is worth contrasting this result with Equation 3, where the time-bounded
information content increase from a deterministic function can be bounded if the inverse function
has a short program which can run efficiently. The statement highlights an important asymmetry
between the function G and its inverse with fixed computation that does not hold with unlimited
computation (e.g. K(G−1) = K(G) + O(1)). Simultaneously, it provides some useful guidance for
synthetic data: if we want to produce interesting information, we should make sure the functions we
use do not have simple and efficiently computable inverses.

As an illustrative example, consider the iterated dynamics of elementary cellular automata (Wol-
fram and Gad-el Hak, 2003; Zhang et al., 2024). An elementary cellular automaton (ECA) is a
one-dimensional array of binary cells that evolves in discrete time steps according to a fixed rule
mapping each cell’s current state and the states of its two immediate neighbors to its next state.
Despite their simple formulation – only 256 possible rules—these systems can produce a rich variety
of behaviors, from stable and periodic patterns to chaotic and computationally universal dynamics.
We setup the problem of predicting Yi = F (Xi) from random initial data Xi for F being an ECA

17

Rule 15Rule 30Rule 5410141017Compute0.00.20.40.60.81.0|P|+Elog1/P(Y|X)×10810141017Compute012345ST(Y|X)×10610141017Compute0.00.20.40.60.81.0HT(Y|X)×108Rule153054iterated 48 times on a grid of size 64, and assemble these pairs into a dataset X = [X1, . . . , XK] and
Y = [Y1, . . . , YK] for a total dataset of D = 100M tokens. We measure the conditional information
content Y |X (epiplexity and entropy) for ECA rules 15, 30, and 54 by training LLMs on this dataset.
We provide a visualization of these dynamics in Figure 3 (left). For the class II rule 15 in the Wolfram
hierarchy (Wolfram and Gad-el Hak, 2003), the produced behavior is periodic and has a simple
inverse. Consequently, in Figure 3 (right), we see that training dynamics that rapidly converge to
optimal predictions and with little epiplexity or time-bounded entropy. With the class III rule 30, the
computation produces outputs that are inherently intractable to predict with limited computation,
and as a result we see that there is maximal time-bounded entropy that is produced but no epiplexity.
For the class IV rule 54, we see that the dynamics are complex but also partly understandable: the
loss decreases slowly and much epiplexity is produced. These results highlight the sensitivity of
epiplexity to the generating process. With the same compute spent and with a very similar program
we can have drastically different outcomes, producing simple objects, producing only random content,
and producing a mix of random and structured content.

5.2 Paradox 2: Information Content is Independent of Factorization

An important property of Shannon’s information is the symmetry of information, which states that the
amount of information content does not change with factorization. The information we acquire when
predicting x and then y is exactly equal to when predicting y and then x: Shannon entropy satisfies
H(Y | X) + H(X) = H(X, Y ) = H(X | Y ) + H(Y ). An analogous property also holds for Kolmogorov
complexity, known as the symmetry of information identity: K(y | x)+K(x) = K(x | y)+K(y)+O(1).

On the other hand, multiple works have observed that natural text is better compressed (with final
model achieving higher likelihoods) when modeled in the left-to-right order (for English) than when
modeled in reverse order (Papadopoulos et al., 2024; Bengio et al., 2019), picking out an arrow of
time in LLMs where one direction of modeling is preferred over the other. It seems likely that for
many documents, other orderings may lead to more information extracted by LLMs. Similarly, as
we will show later, small rearrangements of the data can lead to substantially different losses and
downstream performance. Cryptographic primitives like one way functions and block cyphers also
provide examples where the order of conditioning can make all the difference to how entropic the
data appears, for example considering autoregressive modeling of two prime numbers followed by
their product vs the reverse ordering. These experimental results and cryptographic ideas indicate
what can be learned is dependent on the ordering of the data, which in turn suggests that different
amounts of “information” are extracted from these different orderings.

Our time-bounded definitions capture this discrepancy. Under the existence of one way permutations,
we can prove that a gap in prediction exists over different factorizations for time bounded entropy.

Theorem 13 Let f be a one-way permutation and let X = Un be uniform and Y = f (X).
HPoly(X | Y ) + HPoly(Y ) > HPoly(Y | X) + HPoly(X) + ω(log n).
Proof: see Appendix A.5.

As a corollary, we show no polynomial time probability model which can fit a one way function’s
forward direction can satisfy Bayes theorem (see Theorem 26). Adding to these theoretical results,
we look empirically at the gap in time-bounded entropy for one way functions, and the gap in both
entropy and epiplexity over two orderings of predicting chess data.

In Figure 4(a), we choose f to be given by the 8 steps of evolution of the ECA rule 30 with state
size n and periodic boundary conditions (Wolfram and Gad-el Hak, 2003). Though distinct from
the one way functions used in cryptography, rule 30 is believed to be one way (Wolfram and Gad-el

18

(a) One way functions

(b) Factorization order

(c) Chess orderings

Figure 4: Factorization matters. (a) We compare the losses from modeling a conjectured one way
function in forward and reverse as the state size n is increased. The model reaches Shannon entropy in the
forward direction, but with a persistent gap in the reverse direction. (b) The two orderings produce different
outcomes. Analogous to the OWF, predicting the moves followed by the final board state is the direction
that can be predicted with a straightfoward computation. Predicting the board first and then the moves
requires more complex behaviors. (c) As compute increases, the same chess data presented in the reverse
order leads to higher time-bounded entropy and epiplexity, showing it becomes more difficult to predict but
allows more structure to be learned.

Hak, 2003) and unlike typical one way functions, the forward pass of rule 30 can be modeled by an
autoregressive transformer, which we demonstrate by constructing an explicit RASP-L (Zhou et al.,
2023; Weiss et al., 2021) program in Appendix D. As shown in Figure 4(a), the model achieves the
Shannon entropy (gray) in the forward direction, but has a consistent gap in the reverse direction.

Beyond just how the random information can vary with orderings, the structural information can
also differ as we will show next. We demonstrate this fact by training autoregressive transformer
models on the Lichess dataset, a large collection of chess games where the moves are recorded in
algebraic chess notation. We consider two variants of this dataset: (1) formatting each game as
the move sequence followed by final board state in FEN notation, and (2) formatting each game
as the final board state followed by the move sequence, as illustrated in Figure 4b. We provide
full experiment details in Section C.4. While there is no clear polynomial vs non-polynomial time
separation in this setup, the first ordering is analogous to the forward direction as the final board
state can be straightforwardly mapped from the moves with a simple function, while the latter
ordering is analogous to the reverse direction, where recovering the moves from the final board state
requires the inverse function that infers the intermediate moves from the final state. We hypothesize
the reverse direction is a more complex task and will lead the model to acquire more structural
information, such as a deeper understanding of the board state. Figure 4c confirms this hypothesis,
showing that the reverse order has both time-bounded higher entropy and epiplexity. This gap
vanishes at small compute budgets where the model likely learns only surface statistics common
to both orderings before the additional complexity of the reverse task forces it to develop richer
board-state representations.

5.3 Paradox 3: Likelihood Modeling is Merely Distribution Matching

There is a prevailing view that from a particular training distribution, we can at best hope to match
the data generating process. If there is a property or function that is not present in the data-generating
process, then we should not expect to learn it in our models. As an extension, if the generating
process is simple, then so are models that attempt to match it. This viewpoint can be supported
EX∼Q[− log P (X)] = Q; the
by considering the likelihood maximization process abstractly, arg minP

19

204060n (state size)0255075100HT(AB)+HT(B)Random GuessEntropyforwardreverse"secret""ehjzdv"OWF("secret")="ehjzdv"ForwardReverseW pawn to e4B pawn to e51. e4 e5..."ehjzdv""secret"W pawn to e4B pawn to e51. e4 e5...ForwardReverse10161018Compute45678HT(X)×10910161018Compute0.51.01.52.02.5ST(X)×108OrderForwardReverse(a) Data generating process

(b) Induction (hard)

(c) Induction (easy)

Figure 5: Studying induction through epiplexity. (a) Our setup for creating induction problems. (b)
Predicting Rule 30 ECA with hidden inputs. The LLM must induct on the h bits missing from the input,
paying a cost exponential in h. For h small enough but > 0, epiplexity is increased. (c) Predicting Markov
chain samples with hidden transition probabilities. Models that need to both use the provided probabilities
and induct on the missing ones acquire the most epiplexity.

test NLL is minimized when the two distributions match. The extent to which the distributions differ
is regarded as a failure either from too limited a function class or insufficient data for generalization.
From these arguments we could reasonably believe that AI models cannot surpass human intelligence
when pretraining on human data. Here we provide two classes of phenomena that seem to contradict
this viewpoint: induction, and emergence. In both cases, restricting the compute available to AI
models leads them to extract more structural information than what is required for implementing
the generating process itself.

5.3.1 Induction

The generative modeling community is often challenged with simultaneously wanting a tractable
sampling process and tractable likelihood evaluation, with autoregressors, diffusion models, VAEs,
GANs, and normalizing flows each providing different approaches. For natural generative processes,
it is often the case that one direction may be much more straightforward than the other. Here we
investigate generative processes which can be constructed by transforming latent variables such that
computing likelihoods requires inducting on the values of those latents.

A window into the phenomenon can be appreciated through this quote from Ilya Sutskever:

“You’re reading a murder mystery and at some point the text reveals the identity of the
... If the model can predict [the name] then it must have figured out [who
criminal.
perpetrated the murder from the evidence provided].” (Sutskever, 2019)

The author of the book on the other hand, need not have made that same induction. Instead, they
may have chosen the murderer first and then painted a compelling story of their actions. This
example highlights a gap between the generating process and the requirements of a predictive model,
a gap which we explore with the following more mathematical setup.

As we illustrate in Figure 5(a), consider a simple to model random variable Z over {0, 1}n which
we transform with two functions m and f , which are both short in length and efficient to compute,
and produce the data Y = (m(Z), f (Z)). We choose m : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n−h as a masking function
which removes the bits at a total of h fixed locations in the input, leaving the rest unchanged. The
generating process is simple to implement and can be executed efficiently. Now consider a likelihood
generative model learning to model Y , under any given factorization. With appropriate properties of
the function f , in producing the likelihoods the model must learn to induct on the missing information
in the state Z, and then apply the transformation given by the data generating process. We consider

20

01GenerationPrediction1100111010????101410151016Compute (flops)100101Train Loss (Bits)Hidden Bitsh=0h=1h=2h=3h=4h=5012345Hidden Bits012345Measured Epiplexity×10101310141015Compute (flops)1.31.41.51.6Train Loss (Bits)×103Hidden Rowsh=0h=2h=4h=6h=802468Hidden Rows01234Measured Epiplexity×106cases both where the function f is hard to invert and those where f is not especially hard to invert.
In both cases, predictive circuits must be learned that were not present in the data generating process,
but with hard f these circuits only appear at exponentially high compute.

Induction Hard: Rule 30 ECA. For the first setting we use uniform Z = Un and f as 4 steps of
the rule 30 ECA on state size n = 32, m simply removes the first h bits, and we also compute the
loss only on f (Z) (conditioned on m(Z)) as the bits in m(Z) are uniform and only add noise. We use
an LLM, and the loss curves and measured epiplexities are shown in Figure 5b. The loss converges
to the number of hidden bits − log P (f (Z) | m(Z)) = h, representing the 2h possible inductions on
the hidden state. However, the total compute required for this loss to converge grows exponentially
with h, an overall behavior consistent with a strategy of passing all 2h candidates through f and
then eliminating inconsistent candidates as values of f (Z)i are observed with the autoregressive
factorization. This complex learned function stands in contrast with the mere f (Z) and simple
postprocessing removing bits with masking. This picture is mirrored by the measured epiplexity: as
the model is forced to induct on the missing bits, the epiplexity grows.

Induction Easy: Random Markov Chains. In the second setting, we leverage the statistical
induction heads setup (Edelman et al., 2024) with a few modifications. Z is given by a random
Markov chain transition matrix with V = 8 symbols, and m removes h columns of the matrix at
fixed random locations. The function f (Z) computes a sampled sequence from the Markov chain of
length n = 512. When h > 0, the optimal solution involves 1) using the provided rows Z to perfectly
predict next-token probabilities on V − h of the symbols, and 2) inducting on the missing rows of Z
in-context based on the empirically observed transitions to improve remaining predictions. For h = 0,
the first is sufficient, and for h = 8 the second is sufficient. In Figure 5c, we find evidence that both
strategies are employed whenever 0 < h < 8 as the final loss achieved matches the theoretical loss of
both (the lower of the two dotted lines). The higher horizontal line marks the loss achievable using
1) along with a simple unigram strategy (Edelman et al., 2024), showing that the transformer learns
1) first and later the induction strategy 2). While the data generating program only only involves
strategy one followed by the postprocessing masking step, the model must learn both strategies to
reach these values. Measured epiplexity matches this picture, with values 0 < h < 8 having higher
epiplexity than h = 0 or h = 8. We emphasize that the induction strategy was never present in the
data-generating process, yet it is learned by a generative model trained on that same data distribution.
In Section G, we argue the induction phenomena are not specific to autoregressive models, but occur
more generally for models trained via Maximum Likelihood Estimation as they need to be able to
evaluate the likelihood P (x) for an arbitrary data point x rather than merely sample random x
from P. VAEs (Kingma et al., 2013) provide a clear example of explicitly performing induction in
non-autoregressive models: the encoder is trained specifically to approximate the posterior PZ|X ,
enabling tractable likelihood estimation, yet this encoder is entirely unnecessary if the goal is merely
to sample from the model.

In both of the hard and easy induction examples, the size of the program needed to perform the
induction strategy is greater than the size of the program needed generate the data. We can expect
that with limited computational constraints, it will not be generically possible to invert the generation
process using brute force, and thus, in cases where alternative inverse strategies exist (like the easy
induction example with the statistical induction heads), those additional strategies increase the
epiplexity. Given that there is likely no single generally applicable strategy for these computationally
efficient inverses across problems, it is likely to be possible as a source of epiplexity.

To make these statements more precise, it seems likely that there are no constants c1 and c2 for
which the following property holds:

21

Limited Epiplexity Increase Property: Given any program G : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}n running
in time at most T1 on random variable Z, the epiplexity of G(Z) is increased by at most a
constant more than the size of G: ST2(G(Uk)) ≤ |G|+c1 for T2(n) > T1(k) + c2.

In other words, there is no bound on how much larger the MDL optimal probability model will be than
the generating program even when the model is allowed more compute than the generating program.
We present this phenomenon in contrast to Shannon information or Kolmogorov complexity, where a
function and its inverse can differ in complexity by at most a fixed constant: K(F −1) = K(F ) + O(1).
When the computational constraints are lifted, the brute force inverse is possible, and there is no
essential gap between deduction and induction, or between sampling and likelihood computation.

5.3.2 Emergent Phenomena

One of the most striking counterexamples to the “distribution matching” viewpoint is emergence.
Even when a system’s underlying dynamics admit a simple description, an observer with limited
computation may need to learn a richer, and seemingly unrelated, set of concepts to predict or
explain its behavior. As articulated by Anderson (1972), reductionism—that a complex object’s
behavior follows from its parts—does not guarantee that knowing those parts lets us predict the
whole. Across biology and physics, many-body interactions give rise to behaviors (e.g. bird flocking,
Conway’s Game of Life patterns, molecular chemistry, superconductivity) that are not apparent from
the microscopic laws alone. Here we sketch how emergence critically relates to the computational
constraints of the observer, demonstrating how observers predicting future states may be required to
learn more than their unbounded counterparts who can execute the full generating process.

Consider Type-Ib emergence in the Carroll and Parola (2024) classification, in which higher-level
patterns arise from local rules yet resist prediction from those rules. A canonical example is Conway’s
Game of Life (see Appendix E for definition), where iterating a simple computational rule Φ on a
2D grid leads to complex emergent behavior. For observers that lack the computational resources
to directly compute the iterated evolution Φk, an alternate description must be found. In the state
evolution, one can identify localized “species” (static blocks, oscillators, gliders, guns) which propagate
through space and time. By classifying these species, learning their velocities, and how they are
altered under collisions with other species, as well as the ability to identify their presence in the
initial state, computationally more limited observers can make predictions about the future state of
the system. Doing so, however, requires a more complex program in the sense of description length,
and the epiplexity will be higher. We can formalize this intuition into the following definition of
emergence.

:
Definition 14 (Epiplexity Emergent) Let {Φn}n≥1 be a computable family Φn
{0, 1}n → {0, 1}n and let {Xn}n≥1 be random variables over {0, 1}n. We say (Φ, X) is
epiplexity-emergent if there exist time bounds T1, T2 with T1(n) = o(T2(n)) and an iteration
schedule k(n) such that as n → ∞,

ST1(Φ(X) | X, n) − ST2 (Φ(X) | X, n) = Θ(1) ,
ST1 (Φk(X) | X, n, k) − ST2(Φk(X) | X, n, k) = ω(1),

(10)

where we have suppressed the dependence of Xn and Φn on n for clarity.

22

In words, Φ, X displays emergent phenomena if two observers see equivalent structural complexity
in the one step map, but asymptotically more structural complexity in the multistep map for the
observer with fewer computational resources.

Considering Φ from the Game of Life as an example, P (Φ(X) | X, n) could be well estimated by
both T1 and T2-bounded observers using the exact time evolution rule, using constant bits for both.
P (Φk(X) | X, n, k) could be estimated by T2 using the iterated rule, but not by T1. Using knowledge
of the different pattern species improves predictions of Φk(X) | X, so they would need to be learned;
however, the number of patterns that needs to be considered in the time-bounded optimal solution is
unbounded, and grows with the size of the board n, and thus the gap in epiplexity for the two time
bounds grows with n. We have not proven that the Game of Life satisfies this definition, which is
likely difficult as small changes to the evolution rule can destroy the emergent behavior; however, we
provide empirical evidence for this set being non-empty with the example below.

In Figure 6, we empirically demonstrate the emergence phe-
nomenon by training a transformer to predict the iterated
dynamics of ECA rule 54, a class IV rule that produces complex
patterns. As in Conway’s Game of Life, a model with sufficient
computation can exactly simulate the dynamics by directly
iterating the per-step rule—a brute-force solution with a short
description length. However, a compute-limited model cannot
afford this approach and must instead learn emergent patterns
(e.g., gliders and their collision rules) that approximately short-
cut the infeasible exact simulation. The brute-force solution can
be naturally implemented by learning to autoregressively unroll
intermediate ECA states rather than directly predicting the
final state, resembling the use of chain-of-thought (Wei et al.,
2022) or looped transformers (Dehghani et al., 2018; Giannou
et al., 2023; Saunshi et al., 2025). We provide experiment details in Section C.8. While initially
the non-looped model (directly predicting final state) gradually achieves better MDL and higher
epiplexity as compute increases, we identify a compute threshold beyond which the looped model
suddenly becomes favorable, causing an abrupt drop in MDL and epiplexity, likely by learning the
simple, brute-force solution. Below this threshold, the looped model underperforms likely because it
lacks the compute to fully unroll the dynamics. The non-looped model, unable to rely on brute-force
simulation, must instead learn increasingly sophisticated emergent rules, recognizing more species
and their interactions, thus causing epiplexity to initially rise with compute before eventually falling.

Figure 6: Emergence in ECA.
Compute-constrained models extract
high epiplexity from data generated
by simple rules, trading increased pro-
gram length for reduced computation.

While this experiment cleanly demonstrates how compute-limited models can learn richer structure
from data, it is a more uncommon situation where the brute-force solution is accessible, and where
training with more compute reveals a much simpler underlying structure. With natural data and
compute bounds that are not extraordinarily high, we expect that expending additional compute
leads to increased rather than decreased observed structure.

We explore other kinds of emergence, such as in chaotic dynamical systems or in the optimal strategies
of game playing agents in Appendix F. Each of these examples presents clear evidence that in pursuit
of the best probability distribution to explain the data, observers with limited compute will require
models with greater description length than the minimal data generating process in order to achieve
comparable predictive performance (Martínez et al., 2006; Redeker, 2010). Epiplexity provides a
general tool for understanding and quantifying these phenomena of emergence, and how simple rules
can create meaningful, complex structures that AI models can learn from, as recently demonstrated
empirically by Zhang et al. (2024).

23

10151017Compute0.000.250.500.751.00|P|+Elog1/P(X)×10910151017Compute0.00.51.01.5ST(X)×107non-loopedlooped6 Epiplexity, Pre-Training, and OOD Generalization

Pre-training on internet-scale data has led to remarkable OOD generalization, yet a thorough
understanding of this phenomenon remains elusive. What kinds of data provide the best signal
for enabling broad generalization? Why does pre-training on text yield capabilities that transfer
across domains while image data does not? As high-quality internet data becomes exhausted, what
metric should guide the selection or synthesis of new pre-training data? In this section, we show how
epiplexity helps answer these foundational questions.

OOD generalization is fundamentally about how much reusable structure the model acquires, not
how well it predicts in-distribution. Two models trained on different corpora can achieve the same
in-distribution loss, yet differ dramatically in their ability to transfer to OOD tasks. This happens
because loss captures only the residual unpredictability, corresponding to the time-bounded entropy,
not how much reusable structure the model has internalized to achieve that loss. Epiplexity measures
exactly this missing component: the amount of information in the learned program. Intuitively, loss
indicates how random the data looks to the model, while epiplexity indicates how much structure
the model must acquire to explain away the non-random part. If OOD generalization depends on
reusing learned mechanisms rather than memorizing superficial statistics, then epiplexity is a natural
lens through which to understand the relationship between pre-training data and OOD transfer. As
a motivating toy example, Zhang et al. (2024) observed that downstream task performance benefits
most from training on type IV ECA rules over the other ECA rules, aligned with Figure 3 where we
showed that rule 54 (a type IV rule) induces much higher epiplexity compared to other rules.

6.1 Epiplexity Correlates with OOD Generalization in Chess

We finetune models trained on either ordering from Section 5.2 on
two downstream tasks: (1) solving chess puzzles, where the model
must predict the optimal next move given a board state (Burns
et al., 2023), and (2) predicting centipawn evaluation, where the
model evaluates positional advantage from FEN notation—a more
substantial distribution shift from next-move prediction learned in
pre-training. Experiment details are in Section C.4. As shown
in Figure 7, the reverse (board-then-moves) ordering yields higher
epiplexity and better downstream performance: matching accuracy
on chess puzzles but significantly higher accuracy on the centipawn
task. This result supports our hypothesis: the reverse order forces the
model to develop richer board-state representations needed to infer
the intermediate moves, and these representations transfer to OOD
tasks like centipawn evaluation that similarly require understanding
the board state. This example reflects a more general principle: epiplexity measures the learnable
structural information a model extracts from data to its weights, which is precisely the source
of the information transferable to novel tasks, making epiplexity a plausible indicator for the
potential of OOD generalization. However, we emphasize that higher epiplexity does not guarantee
better generalization to any specific task: epiplexity measures the amount of structural information,
irrespective of its content. A model trained on high epiplexity data can learn a lot of structures, but
these structures may or may not be relevant to the particular downstream task of interest.

Figure 7: Epiplexity and
OOD performance in chess.
Models trained on the higher epi-
plexity reverse order performs
better in OOD tasks.

6.2 Measuring Structural Information in Natural Data

Among different modalities of natural data, language has proven uniquely fruitful for pre-training, not
only for improving in-distribution performance such as language understanding (Radford et al., 2019),

24

Epiplexity0.00.51.01.52.02.5×108Puzzle Acc0.00.10.20.3CP Acc0.00.10.20.3ForwardReverse(a) Epiplexity in natural data (b) Estimation via scaling laws (c) ADO: epiplexity and downstream metrics

Figure 8: Epiplexity reveals differences in the structural information across data modalities
and can guide pre-training data selection. (a) Estimated epiplexity and time-bounded entropy using
requential coding for 1B OpenWebText, Chess, and CIFAR-5M tokens at 6 × 1018 FLOPs. (b) Estimated
values based on scaling laws and prequential coding for 1T language, image, and video tokens at 1025 FLOPs.
(c) Selecting pre-training data using ADO (Jiang et al., 2025) leads to different loss curves than standard
sampling (natural). Our measurement shows ADO selects data with higher epiplexity, in line with the
improved downstream performance and OOD perplexity on different text corpora.

but also for out-of-distribution tasks such as robotics control (Ahn et al., 2022), formal theorem
proving (Song et al., 2024), and time-series forecasting (Gruver et al., 2023). While equally abundant
total information is available in other modalities, such as images and videos, pre-training on those
data sources typically does not confer a similarly broad increase in capabilities. We now show
that epiplexity helps explain this asymmetry by revealing differences in their structural information
content. In Figure 8a, we show the estimated decomposition of the information in 5B tokens of data
from OpenWebText, Lichess, and CIFAR-5M (Nakkiran et al., 2020) into epiplexity (structural) and
time-bounded entropy (random) with a time-bound of 6 × 1018 FLOPs, by training models of up to
160M parameters on at most 5B tokens using requential coding. In all cases, epiplexity accounts for
only a tiny fraction of the total information, with the OpenWebText carrying the most epiplexity,
followed by chess data. Despite having the most total information, CIFAR-5M data has the least
epiplexity, as over 99% of its information is random (e.g., unpredictability of the exact pixels).

6.3 Estimating Epiplexity from Scaling Laws

We can estimate the epiplexities of larger datasets at higher
compute budgets using reported scaling laws, which de-
scribe the loss achieved by an N -parameter model trained
on D tokens as L(N, D) = E + (N/N0)−α + (D/D0)−β,
for some dataset-specific constants α, β, N0, D0, E (Hoff-
mann et al., 2022; Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al.,
2020). By estimating the model’s description length via
the prequential coding approach (Section 4.3), we obtain
estimates for the epiplexity and time-bounded entropy for
language, image, and video datasets, with varying resolu-
tions and tokenizations of size D = 1012 (1T) tokens under
a compute budget of 1025 FLOPs (equivalent to the train-
ing compute of Llama3 70B), illustrated in Figure 8b (see
details in Section C.9). Consistent with our smaller-scale
experiments, we find that language data has the highest
epiplexity, while image data has the least. For image data, applying VQ tokenization leads to a
significant increase in epiplexity, likely as a result of allowing the model to focus on higher-level

Figure 9: Epiplexity and optimal train-
ing tokens for each fixed dataset con-
verge to predictable limits as compute
increases.

25

OWTextChess (R)ChessCIFAR-5M1081091010Information (bits)STHTLanguageImg VQ 322Img VQ 162Vid VQ 163Img 322Img 162Img 8210101012Information (bits)STHT0.02.55.0Step1e42.02.22.42.62.8Training LossADONaturalEpiplexity0.51.01.52.02.51e10Accuracy0.550.560.570.580.590.60Perplexity 112.012.112.212.3Perplexity 213.013.514.014.515.015.516.010221028Compute10910101011ST(X)S(X)10221028Compute10111012Optimal Train TokensD*=LanguageImg VQ 322Img VQ 162Vid VQ 163Img 322Img 162Img 82semantic structures. Video data has less time-bounded entropy and epiplexity than image data with
the same resolution, likely due to significant redundancy across the temporal dimension.

∞ = D and asymptotic epiplexity S∞(X) = β

Using this approach, we can also gain some analytical insights about epiplexity for data admitting
scaling laws of this form. As we derive in Section B.3, for a fixed dataset X with D tokens, the
optimal split of the compute budget between training and inference (evaluating the trained model
on X) approaches a fixed ratio as compute increases, with the optimal asymptotic training tokens
1−β Dβ
0 D1−β, both illustrated in Figure 9. As expected,
D⋆
the maximum amount of extractable structural information is ultimately capped by the dataset size
D when compute is not the bottleneck, and epiplexity can increase further if we also grow the dataset
size. For large D, the scale of the asymptotic epiplexity is primarily determined by β and D0, with
smaller β and larger D0 leading to higher epiplexity, corresponding to slower improvement in loss
and thus more (estimated) information absorbed per token. In line with our discussion on emergence
in Section 5.3.2, it is possible that with significantly more compute much simpler programs can
model these natural datasets, such as by directly simulating the basic laws of physics from which the
natural world emerges, but the amount of required computation is likely so high that such programs
remain inaccessible to any physically realizable observer and we must treat natural data as having
high epiplexity for all practical purposes.

6.4 Pre-Training Data Selection and Curriculum for Language Models

A crucial step in pretraining a language model is designing the composition of the pretraining data,
but there lack clear guidelines for this step. Existing data mixtures are designed through extensive
trial-and-error and rely on heuristic guidelines such as “diversity” or “high-quality”. More importantly,
the primary way of comparing different training data is via perplexity metrics of held-out datasets and
downstream performance. These procedures are highly susceptible to data contamination, overfitting
to a narrow set of downstream evaluations, and Goodhart’s law. After all, no suite of downstream
evaluations is extensive enough to faithfully capture the range of tasks that a general-purpose language
model will encounter in the real world.

As we argued above, epiplexity measures the structural information learned by the model, which
could be affected by data selection strategies. Jiang et al. (2025) demonstrated that models of the
loss curves for different data subsets can be used to dynamically adjust the data distribution online to
favor data subsets whose training losses are decreasing faster 5. Intuitively, this objective aligns with
increasing the prequential estimate of epiplexity described in Section 4.1 by maximizing information
absorbed per token. We hypothesize that the proposed algorithm, Adaptive Data Optimization
(ADO), inadvertently achieves higher epiplexity. Experiments of Jiang et al. (2025) are conducted on
decoder-only transformers with 1.3B parameters trained on 125B tokens from the Pile dataset (Gao
et al., 2020). The models are evaluated on a suite of 7 zero-shot downstream tasks and two OOD
validation datasets, SlimPajama (Soboleva et al., 2023) and FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024).

In Figure 8c(c), we show the estimated epiplexity and the downstream performance as well as
perplexity on two OOD datasets, adapted from Jiang et al. (2025). As shown in Jiang et al. (2025),
ADO achieves higher downstream performance than a standard data sampling strategy that uniformly
samples from the entire dataset (denoted by Natural in Figure 8c), despite not being optimized for
any of these metrics. Interestingly, we see that ADO indeed achieves higher epiplexity measured by
prequential coding. While these downstream evaluations do not capture everything about a pretrained
model, they do offer evidence that epiplexity is a potentially useful concept for understanding the
intrinsic value of pretraining data without particular downstream evaluations.

5. It is worth noting that choosing data subsets with faster-decreasing loss does not mean that the observed training
loss would be smaller because such data subsets tend to have higher loss values since there is more learnable
information in them. Consequently, training on them often leads to a larger area under the training loss curve.

26

7 Additional Related Work

Epiplexity builds on a number of related ideas in algorithmic information theory and complexity
science that attempt to theoretically characterize meaningful information. A group of closely related
concepts are sophistication (subsection 2.2), effective complexity, and logical depth. Similar to
sophistication, effective complexity aims to separate random from structural content (Gell-Mann and
Lloyd, 1996). From a different starting point, Bennett (1988) introduced logical depth, measuring
the number of time steps required by a nearly optimal program to produce a given string, and which
was later shown to be equivalent to sophistication through the busy beaver function (Antunes et al.,
2005; Ay et al., 2010). Several other formal measures have been developed to quantify structured
or meaningful complexity. Algorithmic statistics offers a principled decomposition of data into
regular versus random components by introducing the notion of an algorithmic sufficient statistic
(Vereshchagin and Vitányi, 2004), a concept closely tied to sophistication. Relatedly, statistical
complexity in computational mechanics (Shalizi and Crutchfield, 2001) measures the entropy of
causal states in an optimally predictive model, capturing structure in time-series data. As we argued
above, these existing notions of complexity do not account for the limited computation available to
the observer, which is essential for understanding machine learning algorithms. Being oblivious to
computational limits means that they cannot characterize CSPRNGs or encrypted objects as being
random. One might think that these failures are surface-level; for example, a plausible strategy would
be to upgrade sophistication by replacing Kolmogorov complexity with time-bounded Kolmogorov
complexity in (Definition 5). However, this approach does not work for several reasons, the most
obvious being that CSPRNG outputs do have short and efficiently runnable generating programs
and thus their time-bounded Kolmogorov complexities are small. A more subtle reason is that doing
so results in trivial sophistication for all strings, which we discuss in more detail in Appendix A.6.

Our work is also closely related to several lines of work trying to characterize observer-dependent
notions of information. In cryptography, Barak et al. (2003) and Hsiao et al. (2007) discuss several
possible definitions for computational pseudoentropy, an observer-dependent analogue of entropy.
HILL-pseudoentropy (Håstad et al., 1999) is defined relative to a class of tests: a source is considered
random if no test within the class can distinguish it from a high-entropy distribution with nontrivial
advantage, and Yao-pseudoentropy is defined via compressing and decompressing an object for
example. Both definitions are closely related to time-bounded entropy, which measures the random
content to a given computationally bounded observer; however, our formulation directly maps on to
machine learning practice and allows for separating out the structural information content, a key
contribution of our work. More recently, Xu et al. (2020) propose V-entropy, a generalization of
Shannon entropy to the minimum expected negative log probability over a given family of probability
models, such as those with given computational constraints. With V-entropy, the symmetry of
information can be violated, and so too can the data processing inequality, though neither is explicitly
proven in the paper. Unlike time-bounded entropy, the computational constraint in V-entropy only
limits the inference time, and does not account for the time to find such a model. Hence, the
minimizer can be far away from the regime that is practically evaluated (such as models that are
trained on infinite data or with infinite compute). While these undesirable behaviors can be overcome
by imposing further data constraints, we believe our formulation of imposing a single bound on both
training and inference time leads to fewer complications. More importantly, both pseudoentropy
and V-entropy, much like time-bounded entropy, capture only the random component of information
since it still measures the unpredictability of the random variable under the best feasible model. For
understanding what useful information a model has learned, we are more interested in the non-random
component of information as measured by epiplexity. Using existing measures of complexity, such
as the Lempel-Ziv complexity and Wolfram classification, Zhang et al. (2024) showed that models
trained on complex data like Class IV ECA rules tend to perform better on downstream tasks.

27

Other parts, such as the area under the curve estimate of epiplexity, have seen some related
exploration in prior work. The concept of excess entropy, independently introduced under various
names (Crutchfield and Packard, 1983; Shaw, 1984; Grassberger, 1986) and reviewed in Feldman
(1998), is defined as the area between finite-block entropy density estimates and the asymptotic
entropy rate of a stationary process, an analogous construction to our prequential estimate of
epiplexity. However, excess entropy is defined for stationary processes observed by computationally
unbounded agents, lacking the explicit dependence on the observer’s compute budget that we view
as essential for the machine learning setting. More recently, Whitney et al. (2020) introduced surplus
description length (SDL), which is the summed online loss of the training algorithm, with either the
entropy of the data or a fixed baseline performance subtracted out. The authors use this measurement
to evaluate pre-trained representations for solving a downstream task, arguing that smaller SDL is
preferred as they lead to more efficient downstream learning. In contrast, we seek to create datasets
and interventions to the data which increase epiplexity. More analogous to the spirit of epiplexity is
information transfer from Zhang et al. (2020), which sums a variant of a loss difference, adapted to
held out test data and for the classification setting. In this work, the authors present information
transfer to measure how much is learned from the data. Epiplexity is complementary to these works,
clarifying the role of computation in defining information, and explicitly separating random and
structural information.

Several works have also explored how to quantify data complexity. Dziugaite and Roy (2025) suggests
that the complexity of a minimal near-optimal reference model can be viewed as a measure of data
complexity under the PAC-Bayes framework and how such data complexity gives rise to empirical
scaling laws. This perspective is related to epiplexity in that both associate data complexity with the
size of compact models that explain the data well. However, the two notions differ in important ways.
In particular, the PAC-Bayes formulation is concerned with the existence of some small reference
model achieving good in-distribution performance, whereas epiplexity characterizes the amount of
structural information extractable by a computationally bounded observer, formalized through a
two-part code that explicitly accounts for the cost of obtaining such a model. Further, our primary
interest is not in characterizing in-distribution generalization, but in using epiplexity to measure the
intrinsic value of data in settings that extend beyond supervised learning. Relatedly, Hutter (2021)
shows that power-law learning curves can emerge under specific assumptions on the data-generating
distribution, illustrating how properties of the data itself can shape empirical scaling behavior. While
this line of work focuses on explaining observed learning dynamics rather than defining a complexity
measure, it similarly emphasizes the role of data structure in determining learning outcomes. These
perspectives on data complexity can be viewed as instances of coarse graining, where one seeks a
compressed representation that preserves some notion of “relevant” structure. A canonical example
is the information bottleneck framework, which formalizes coarse graining as a trade-off between
compression and retained information about a relevant variable (Tishby et al., 2000). Epiplexity
is aligned with this perspective, but rather than defining relevance through a task variable or
through distinguishability to tests, it measures the amount of structural information extractable by a
computationally bounded learner, while explicitly accounting for the cost of obtaining the model.

More broadly, our work is related to several lines of work on how resource constraints fundamentally
alter the notion of simplicity and learnability. In algorithmic information theory, Schmidhuber (2002)
proposes the speed prior, which replaces Solomonoff’s universal prior with a computable semimeasure
that favors both shorter program length and smaller computation time, thereby incorporating
computational resources directly into the definition of simplicity. Achille and Soatto (2025) argue
that in the transductive setting, the role of information from past data is to reduce the time needed
to solve new tasks rather than to reduce uncertainty, with the optimal speedup tightly characterized
by the amount of shared algorithmic information between past data and future tasks. In this setting,
larger information content is shown to be more conducive to better performance. In learning theory,
a related line of work shows that computational limitations can directly affect what can be learned

28

from data. For instance, in the problem of sparse PCA detection, Berthet and Rigollet (2013) show
that although there exist procedures that succeed with an information-theoretically minimal number
of samples, any algorithm that runs in polynomial time necessarily requires more data under widely
used average-case hardness assumptions. Memory and space constraints alone can also qualitatively
change learnability. Steinhardt et al. (2016) show that restricting a learner’s memory can dramatically
increase the amount of data required to learn, even when the target concept itself has a very concise
description. They identify parity functions as a canonical example where this tension is conjectured
to be sharp. Raz (2018) later resolves this conjecture by proving that any learner with sub-quadratic
memory requires exponentially many samples to learn parity from random examples.

8 Discussion

Much of classical information theory is concerned with the representation and transmission of
information, and abstracts away key aspects of the computational processes by which information is
extracted and used. While complexity theory and cryptography treat computation as fundamental,
machine learning theory typically does not. Yet learning, whether biological or artificial, is an
inherently computational process. What can be learned from data depends not only on statistical
feasibility, but on the available resources. This perspective calls for more theoretical tools that place
computation on an equal footing with information.

This work reframes information as a property of data relative to a computationally bounded observer,
and demonstrates that information can be decomposed into time-bounded entropy and epiplexity,
a formalization of structural information. It also sheds light on how perceived information can
be changed through computation. This perspective resolves several tensions between information
theory and empirical machine learning—including the usefulness of synthetic data, the dependence
of learning on factorization and ordering, and the emergence of structure beyond the data-generating
process itself. Technically, epiplexity connects ideas from algorithmic statistics, cryptography, and
learning theory, showing that standard assumptions (i.e., existence of one-way functions) suffice to
produce distributions with high structural complexity for efficient learners.

Our framework opens several exciting directions for future work. On the theoretical side, it invites
a systematic and more fine-grained understanding of how structural information changes with
computational budget, model class, and data transformations, potentially yielding new lower bounds
and impossibility results for representation learning and transfer. Taking information and computation
as the fundamental resources may offer new explanations for the relative universality observed in
large-scale training, including why scaling law exponents depend only weakly on architectural and
optimizer details. There is also a possibility of a compute-aware analogue of classical notions such as
sufficient statistics and information bottlenecks. More broadly, framing emergence, induction, and
generalization through the lens of computationally bounded observers may offer a unifying language
across learning theory, algorithmic information theory, cryptography, and complexity theory.

On the empirical side, epiplexity provides a way to reason about why some data sources, formatting,
and transformations can lead to more transferable models than others, even when they do not
improve training loss. The framework suggests that pretraining data should be evaluated not only by
held-out perplexity, but by how much reusable structural information it induces in a computationally
bounded model. This perspective helps explain empirical successes of curriculum design, data
ordering, augmentation strategies, and even synthetic data that appear counterintuitive from a purely
statistical viewpoint. Our empirical estimator offers a concrete starting point for comparing datasets
and interventions in data centric research. In the long run, we believe epiplexity could provide
guidance on how to generate new synthetic data from existing data.

29

Finally, representation learning can be understood as the gradual accumulation of epiplexity: the
construction of increasingly rich internal programs that approximate a data distribution within a
fixed time budget. While epiplexity in isolation is not a measure of generalization, or a complete
theory of learning, this perspective raises the possibility of new notions of hardness for learning and
transfer that are orthogonal to classical PAC-style measures, capturing not sample complexity but
the size of the structure that must be extracted. Such notions may help explain why certain tasks
appear to require disproportionately large models or long training horizons despite admitting simple
generative descriptions, and why improvements in generalization sometimes correlate more strongly
with training dynamics or data structure than with likelihood alone.

Acknowledgements. We thank NSF CAREER IIS-2145492, NSF CDS&E-MSS 2134216, and
DARPA AIQ HR00112590066 for support, and Scott Aaronson, Alan Amin, Brandon Amos, Martin
Marek, Zhili Feng, Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Patrick Shafto, Charlie Chen, Alex Ozdemir, Andres
Potapczynski, and Ethan Baron for helpful feedback. This work was supported by Google’s TPU
Research Cloud (TRC) program: https://sites.research.google/trc. YJ thanks the support of
the Google PhD Fellowship, and SQ thanks the support of the Two Sigma Fellowship.

References

Scott Aaronson, Sean M Carroll, and Lauren Ouellette. Quantifying the rise and fall of complexity

in closed systems: the coffee automaton. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.6903, 2014.

Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Harkirat Behl, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar,
Michael Harrison, Russell J Hewett, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, et al. Phi-4 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.08905, 2024.

Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. Ai agents as universal task solvers.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:2510.12066, 2025.

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.

Eric Allender, Michal Kouck`y, Detlef Ronneburger, and Sambuddha Roy. The pervasive reach of
resource-bounded kolmogorov complexity in computational complexity theory. Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, 77(1):14–40, 2011.

Philip W Anderson. More is different: Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure

of science. Science, 177(4047):393–396, 1972.

Luis Antunes, Lance Fortnow, Dieter van Melkebeek, and N. V. Vinodchandran. Sophistication

revisited. Theory of Computing Systems, 38(4):535–555, 2005.

Benny Applebaum. Cryptographic hardness of random local functions: Survey. Computational

complexity, 25(3):667–722, 2016.

Nihat Ay, Markus Müller, and Arleta Szkola. Effective complexity and its relation to logical depth.

IEEE transactions on information theory, 56(9):4593–4607, 2010.

Johannes Ballé, David Minnen, Saurabh Singh, Sung Jin Hwang, and Nick Johnston. Variational

image compression with a scale hyperprior. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01436, 2018.

30

Boaz Barak, Ronen Shaltiel, and Avi Wigderson. Computational analogues of entropy. In International
Workshop on Randomization and Approximation Techniques in Computer Science, pages 200–215.
Springer, 2003.

Yoshua Bengio, Tristan Deleu, Nasim Rahaman, Rosemary Ke, Sébastien Lachapelle, Olexa Bilaniuk,
Anirudh Goyal, and Christopher Pal. A meta-transfer objective for learning to disentangle causal
mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10912, 2019.

Charles H Bennett. Logical depth and physical complexity. The Universal Turing Machine: A

Half-Century Survey, 1:227–257, 1988.

Quentin Berthet and Philippe Rigollet. Computational lower bounds for sparse pca. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1304.0828, 2013.

Manuel Blum and Silvio Micali. How to generate cryptographically strong sequences of pseudo
random bits. In 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1982), pages
112–117, 1982. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1982.72.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
//github.com/jax-ml/jax.

Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner,
Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, et al. Weak-to-strong generalization:
Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09390, 2023.

Sean M Carroll and Achyuth Parola. What emergence can possibly mean.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:2410.15468, 2024.

Gregory J Chaitin. Information-theoretic limitations of formal systems. Journal of the ACM (JACM),

21(3):403–424, 1974.

Gregory J Chaitin. A theory of program size formally identical to information theory. Journal of the

ACM (JACM), 22(3):329–340, 1975.

Gregory J Chaitin. The limits of mathematics: A course on information theory and the limits of

formal reasoning. Springer, 1998.

James P Crutchfield and NH719053 Packard. Symbolic dynamics of noisy chaos. Physica D: Nonlinear

Phenomena, 7(1-3):201–223, 1983.

A Philip Dawid. Present position and potential developments: Some personal views statistical theory
the prequential approach. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General), 147(2):
278–290, 1984.

Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lukasz Kaiser. Universal

transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03819, 2018.

Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Elliot Catt, Tim Genewein, Christopher
Mattern, Jordi Grau-Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Matthew Aitchison, Laurent Orseau, et al. Language
modeling is compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10668, 2023.

Nolan Dey, Bin Claire Zhang, Lorenzo Noci, Mufan Li, Blake Bordelon, Shane Bergsma, Cengiz
Pehlevan, Boris Hanin, and Joel Hestness. Don’t be lazy: Completep enables compute-efficient
deep transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.01618, 2025.

31

Rod Downey and Denis R Hirschfeldt. Algorithmic randomness. Communications of the ACM, 62

(5):70–80, 2019.

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. The size of teachers as a measure of data complexity:
Pac-bayes excess risk bounds and scaling laws. In The 28th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, 2025.

Benjamin L Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The evolution
of statistical induction heads: In-context learning markov chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11004,
2024.

David Feldman. Information theory, excess entropy. 1998.

Marc Finzi, Sanyam Kapoor, Diego Granziol, Anming Gu, Christopher De Sa, J Zico Kolter, and
Andrew Gordon Wilson. Compute-optimal llms provably generalize better with scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.15208, 2025.

Marc Finzi, et, and al. Requential coding. Forthcoming, 2026.

Aviezri S Fraenkel and David Lichtenstein. Computing a perfect strategy for n× n chess requires
time exponential in n. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming,
pages 278–293. Springer, 1981.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.

Martin Gardner. Mathematical games. Scientific american, 222(6):132–140, 1970.

Murray Gell-Mann and Seth Lloyd. Information measures, effective complexity, and total information.

Complexity, 2(1):44–52, 1996.

Matthias Gerstgrasser, Rylan Schaeffer, Apratim Dey, Rafael Rafailov, Henry Sleight, John Hughes,
Tomasz Korbak, Rajashree Agrawal, Dhruv Pai, Andrey Gromov, et al.
Is model collapse
inevitable? breaking the curse of recursion by accumulating real and synthetic data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.01413, 2024.

Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D Lee, and Dimitris
Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 11398–11442. PMLR, 2023.

Micah Goldblum, Marc Finzi, Keefer Rowan, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. The no free lunch theorem,
kolmogorov complexity, and the role of inductive biases in machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05366, 2023.

Oded Goldreich. Foundations of Cryptography: Volume 1, Basic Tools. Cambridge University Press,

2006.

Oded Goldreich and Leonid A Levin. A hard-core predicate for all one-way functions. In Proceedings

of the twenty-first annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 25–32, 1989.

Peter Grassberger. Toward a quantitative theory of self-generated complexity. International Journal

of Theoretical Physics, 25(9):907–938, 1986.

Peter D Grünwald. The minimum description length principle. MIT press, 2007.

Peter D Grünwald, PM Vitányi, et al. Algorithmic information theory, 2008.

32

Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, and Andrew G Wilson. Large language models are zero-shot
time series forecasters. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:19622–19635, 2023.

Alex Hägele, Elie Bakouch, Atli Kosson, Leandro Von Werra, Martin Jaggi, et al. Scaling laws
and compute-optimal training beyond fixed training durations. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 37:76232–76264, 2024.

Johan Håstad, Russell Impagliazzo, Leonid A Levin, and Michael Luby. A pseudorandom generator

from any one-way function. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1364–1396, 1999.

Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Chun-Yuan Hsiao, Chi-Jen Lu, and Leonid Reyzin. Conditional computational entropy, or toward
separating pseudoentropy from compressibility. In Annual International Conference on the Theory
and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 169–186. Springer, 2007.

Marcus Hutter. Learning curve theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04074, 2021.

Yiding Jiang, Allan Zhou, Zhili Feng, Sadhika Malladi, and J Zico Kolter. Adaptive data optimization:
Dynamic sample selection with scaling laws. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aqok1UX7Z1.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Diederik P Kingma, Max Welling, et al. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2013.

A. N. Kolmogorov. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information *. International
Journal of Computer Mathematics, 2(1-4):157–168, 1968. doi: 10.1080/00207166808803030. URL
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207166808803030.

Moshe Koppel. Structure. In Rolf Herken, editor, The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century

Survey, pages 435–452. Oxford University Press, 1988.

Leon G. Kraft. A device for quantizing, grouping, and coding amplitude-modulated pulses. S.m.
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 1949. URL https://hdl.handle.
net/1721.1/12390.

Ming Li and Paul Vitányi. An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its applications. Springer,

New York, NY, 2008.

Ming Li, Paul Vitányi, et al. An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its applications, volume 3.

Springer, 2008.

Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.

33

Yanyi Liu and Rafael Pass. A direct prf construction from kolmogorov complexity. In Annual
International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages
375–406. Springer, 2024.

David JC MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university

press, 2003.

Pratyush Maini, Skyler Seto, He Bai, David Grangier, Yizhe Zhang, and Navdeep Jaitly. Rephras-
arXiv preprint

ing the web: A recipe for compute and data-efficient language modeling.
arXiv:2401.16380, 2024.

Per Martin-Löf. The definition of random sequences. Information and control, 9(6):602–619, 1966.

Genaro Juárez Martínez, Andrew Adamatzky, and Harold V McIntosh. Phenomenology of glider
collisions in cellular automaton rule 54 and associated logical gates. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 28
(1):100–111, 2006.

Sean McLeish, John Kirchenbauer, David Yu Miller, Siddharth Singh, Abhinav Bhatele, Micah
Goldblum, Ashwinee Panda, and Tom Goldstein. Gemstones: A model suite for multi-faceted
scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06857, 2025.

Brockway McMillan. Two inequalities implied by unique decipherability. IRE Transactions on

Information Theory, 2(4):115–116, December 1956. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1956.1056818.

Ralph C Merkle. Secure communications over insecure channels. Communications of the ACM, 21

(4):294–299, 1978.

Roger J. Metzger. Sinai-ruelle-bowen measures for contracting Lorenz maps and flows. Annales de
l’I.H.P. Analyse non linéaire, 17(2):247–276, 2000. URL https://www.numdam.org/item/AIHPC_
2000__17_2_247_0/.

Francisco Mota, Scott Aaronson, Luís Antunes, and André Souto. Sophistication as randomness
deficiency. In Descriptional Complexity of Formal Systems: 15th International Workshop, DCFS
2013, London, ON, Canada, July 22-25, 2013. Proceedings 15, pages 172–181. Springer, 2013.

Preetum Nakkiran, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. The deep bootstrap framework: Good

online learners are good offline generalizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08127, 2020.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.

OpenAI. GPT-5 System Card. https://cdn.openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf, August 2025.

Version dated August 13, 2025. Accessed: 2026-01-05.

Vassilis Papadopoulos, Jérémie Wenger, and Clément Hongler. Arrows of time for large language
In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://

models.
openreview.net/forum?id=UpSe7ag34v.

Tim Pearce and Jinyeop Song. Reconciling kaplan and chinchilla scaling laws. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2406.12907, 2024.

Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin A Raffel, Leandro
Von Werra, Thomas Wolf, et al. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data
at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:30811–30849, 2024.

34

Ya B Pesin. Characteristic lyapunov exponents and smooth ergodic theory. Russian Mathematical

Surveys, 32(4):55, 1977.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language

models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Ran Raz. Fast learning requires good memory: A time-space lower bound for parity learning. Journal

of the ACM (JACM), 66(1):1–18, 2018.

Markus Redeker. A language for particle interactions in one-dimensional cellular automata. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1012.0158, 2010.

Jorma Rissanen. Minimum description length principle. Encyclopedia of statistical sciences, 7, 2004.

John K Salmon, Mark A Moraes, Ron O Dror, and David E Shaw. Parallel random numbers: as
easy as 1, 2, 3. In Proceedings of 2011 international conference for high performance computing,
networking, storage and analysis, pages 1–12, 2011.

Nikunj Saunshi, Nishanth Dikkala, Zhiyuan Li, Sanjiv Kumar, and Sashank J Reddi. Reasoning with
latent thoughts: On the power of looped transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17416, 2025.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. The speed prior: a new simplicity measure yielding near-optimal computable
predictions. In International conference on computational learning theory, pages 216–228. Springer,
2002.

Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. The sources of kolmogorov’s grundbegriffe. 2006.

Cosma Rohilla Shalizi and James P Crutchfield. Computational mechanics: Pattern and prediction,

structure and simplicity. Journal of Statistical Physics, 104(3–4):817–879, 2001.

Claude E Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical journal, 27

(3):379–423, 1948.

Claude E. Shannon. Programming a computer for playing chess. Philosophical Magazine, 41(314):

256–275, 1950.

Robert Shaw. The dripping faucet as a model chaotic system. (No Title), 1984.

David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144,
2018.

Daria Soboleva, Faisal Al-Khateeb, Robert Myers, Jacob R Steeves, Joel Hestness, and Nolan Dey.
SlimPajama: A 627B token cleaned and deduplicated version of RedPajama. https://cerebras.
ai/blog/slimpajama-a-627b-token-cleaned-and-deduplicated-version-of-redpajama,
2023. URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/cerebras/SlimPajama-627B.

Peiyang Song, Kaiyu Yang, and Anima Anandkumar. Towards large language models as copilots for

theorem proving in lean. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12534, 2024.

Jacob Steinhardt, Gregory Valiant, and Stefan Wager. Memory, communication, and statistical

queries. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1490–1516. PMLR, 2016.

Ilya Sutskever. Gpt-2. Presented at the Scaled Machine Learning Conference 2019, Computer History

Museum, 2019. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0I88NhR_9M.

35

Sebastiaan A Terwijn. The mathematical foundations of randomness. In The Challenge of Chance: A
Multidisciplinary Approach from Science and the Humanities, pages 49–66. Springer International
Publishing Cham, 2016.

Lucas Theis and Noureldin Y Ahmed. Algorithms for the communication of samples. In International

Conference on Machine Learning, pages 21308–21328. PMLR, 2022.

Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. arXiv

preprint physics/0004057, 2000.

Nikolay Vereshchagin and Paul M.B. Vitányi. Kolmogorov’s structure functions and model selection.

IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 50(12):3265–3290, 2004.

John von Neumann. Zur theorie der gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische Annalen, 100(1):295–320,

1928.

John Von Neumann. Various techniques used in connection with random digits. Appl. Math Ser, 12

(36-38):3, 1951.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Conference

on Machine Learning, pages 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021.

William F Whitney, Min Jae Song, David Brandfonbrener, Jaan Altosaar, and Kyunghyun Cho.
Evaluating representations by the complexity of learning low-loss predictors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.07368, 2020.

Stephen Wolfram and M Gad-el Hak. A new kind of science. Appl. Mech. Rev., 56(2):B18–B19, 2003.

Yilun Xu, Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, Russell Stewart, and Stefano Ermon. A theory of usable

information under computational constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10689, 2020.

Greg Yang and Etai Littwin. Tensor programs ivb: Adaptive optimization in the infinite-width limit.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01814, 2023.

Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder,
Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural networks
via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.

Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Theory and applications of trapdoor functions (extended abstract). In 23rd
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 80–91. IEEE Computer
Society, 1982. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1982.95.

Shiyang Zhang, Aakash Patel, Syed A Rizvi, Nianchen Liu, Sizhuang He, Amin Karbasi, Emanuele
Zappala, and David van Dijk. Intelligence at the edge of chaos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02536,
2024.

Xiao Zhang, Xingjian Li, Dejing Dou, and Ji Wu. Measuring information transfer in neural networks.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07624, 2020.

Hattie Zhou, Arwen Bradley, Etai Littwin, Noam Razin, Omid Saremi, Josh Susskind, Samy Bengio,
and Preetum Nakkiran. What algorithms can transformers learn? a study in length generalization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16028, 2023.

36

Appendix Outline

This appendix provides the technical details, proofs, and experimental specifications supporting the
main text.

Appendix A presents rigorous proofs of all theoretical results, including properties of cryptographi-
cally secure pseudorandom number generators under time-bounded entropy and epiplexity (Theorem
9), creation of information through deterministic transformations (Theorem 12), the existence of
high-epiplexity random variables (Theorem 10), the factorization dependence of information content
(Theorem 13).

Appendix B details the practical methodology for estimating epiplexity, covering both prequential
and requential coding implementations, hyperparameter optimization procedures for compute-optimal
two-part codes, the connection between prequential and requential estimates under a static teacher
assumption, and a solvable analytical model combining neural scaling laws with prequential coding.
We also establish general properties showing that optimal model size and training tokens increase
monotonically with compute budget, that optimal training tokens for prequential coding generally
saturate at the test set size for large compute budgets, and that epiplexity and per-token entropy
exhibit predictable monotonicity with respect to dataset size.

Appendix C provides comprehensive experimental specifications for all empirical results, includ-
ing architectural choices, hyperparameters, and dataset details for elementary cellular automata
experiments, easy and hard variants of induction tasks, chess experiments (with both pre-training
data formatting and downstream evaluation tasks), natural data experiments on OpenWebText
and CIFAR-5M, comparisons between prequential and requential coding estimates, and scaling law
estimation procedures.

Appendix D presents executable RASP-L code demonstrating that elementary cellular automa-
ton evolution rules can be implemented within the transformer computational model, providing
constructive evidence that autoregressive transformers are capable of solving these tasks.

Appendix E contains definitions of elementary cellular automata and Conway’s Game of Life,
emergence examples referenced in the paper.

Appendix F explores additional examples illustrating the relationship between emergence and
epiplexity, including the Lorenz system as a case study in chaotic dynamics where entropy is created
at a rate determined by Lyapunov exponents, and chess strategy as exemplified by the contrast
between AlphaZero’s multi-million parameter networks solution at moderate compute and the simple
minimax algorithm available at very high compute.

Appendix G argues that induction phenomena occur not merely in autoregressive models; instead,
the key requirement is maximum likelihood estimation rather than autoregressive factorization
specifically.

Appendix H provides a more comprehensive review of MDL, in particular on two-part code, one-part
code and the notion of regret, related to epiplexity.

Compute Resources. A cluster of 6 2080Ti was used for many of the smaller scale experiments.
A cluster of 6 Titan RTX and 32 TPUv4 provided by the Google TPU Research Cloud was used for
the more computationally expensive natural data experiments. We refer the reader to Jiang et al.
(2025) for computational resources required in evaluating ADO.

Licenses. The Chess data used in Section 5.2 is released under Creative Commons CC0 license
(database.lichess.org/). The OpenWebText dataset used in Section 6.2 is released under Creative
Commons CC0 license.

37

Appendix A. Proofs

First, we prove two short lemmas about the basic properties of epiplexity and time-bounded entropy.

Lemma 15 (Maximum expected description length) For any random variable X on
{0, 1}n there exists constants c1, c2, c3 such that:

ST (X) + HT (X) ≤ n + c1

(11)

for time bounds T (n) ≥ c2n + c3.

Proof Let Un be the uniform distribution Qunif (x) = 2−n. Qunif can be computed in linear time
(just by outputting 2−n for each input) and with a program of constant size c1 and in time c2n + c3
with constants depending on the Turing machine..

|Q⋆

X |+E[− log Q⋆

X (x)] ≤ |Qunif |+E[− log Qunif (x)] ≤ c + n.

Lemma 16 (Time-bounded entropy of uniform distribution) Let X = Un be the uni-
form distribution on {0, 1}n. The time-bounded entropy of Un for T (n) ≥ c2n + c3 is:

n ≤ HT (X) ≤ n + c1.

(12)

Proof

For the lower bound, we have

EX [− log Q(X)] = H(X) + DKL(PX ∥Q) ≥ H(X) = n

given that the KL is always positive. For the upper bound, we have that

HT (X) ≤ MDLT (X) ≤ n + c

.

A.1 PRGs/CSPRNGs have (nearly) maximal time-bounded Entropy and low epiplexity

Theorem 17 Let X = Uk and n = ℓ(k) for a non-uniform PRG G that admits advantage
ε(n). Then, for every polynomial time bound T (n),

HT (G(Uk)) ≥ n − 2 − n ε(k).

(13)

Proof Fix P ∈ PT and let L(x) = − log P (x). For each precision level t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, we define
the following distinguisher:

Dt(x) = 1{L(x) ≤ n − t} = 1{P (x) ≥ 2−(n−t)}.

38

For any solution P for MDLT , we have that MDLT (X) = |P|+E[− log P (X)] ≤ n + c. Since both
quantities are positive, it must be the case that |P|≤ n + c, which means that |P|∈ poly(n). Since P
belongs in PT and cannot be longer than n, each Dt is a non-uniform PPT algorithm with polysized
advice (i.e., P) that PRGs are secure against.

Uniform threshold bound. Let Un be uniform on {0, 1}n and set At := {x : Dt(x) = 1}.

Hence ,

1 ≥

(cid:88)

x

P (x) ≥

(cid:88)

x∈At

P (x) ≥ |At|2−(n−t) ⇒ |At|≤ 2n−t.

Pr[Dt(Un) = 1] =

|At|
2n ≤

2n−t
2n = 2−t.

PRG transfers bound to X := G(Uk). By the security of G, for each t,

Pr[Dt(X) = 1] ≤ Pr[Dt(Un) = 1] + ε(k) ≤ 2−t + ε(k),

From threshold probabilities to an entropy lower bound. For any non-negative random
variable Z, we have the layercake representation:

∞
(cid:88)

E[Z] =

(1 − P (Z ≤ u))

n − E[Z] =

=

=

≤

u=0

n−1
(cid:88)

u=0

n−1
(cid:88)

u=0

n−1
(cid:88)

u=0

n−1
(cid:88)

u=0

1 −

1 −

∞
(cid:88)

u=0

(1 − P (Z ≤ u))

n−1
(cid:88)

(1 − P (Z ≤ u)) −

u=0

∞
(cid:88)

u=n

(1 − P (Z ≤ u))

(1 − P (Z ≤ u))

P (Z ≤ u) −

∞
(cid:88)

u=n

P (Z ≤ u).

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

Now we change the bounds to be in terms of t with t = n − u. The lower bound becomes t = n. The
upper bound becomes t = 1, which yields

n − E[Z] ≤

n−1
(cid:88)

u=0

P (Z ≤ u) =

n
(cid:88)

t=1

P (Z ≤ n − t).

Let Z = L(X) = − log P (X):

n − E[Z] ≤

n
(cid:88)

t=1

P (Z ≤ n − t) =

n
(cid:88)

t=1

P (Dt(X) = 1) ≤

n
(cid:88)

t=1

2−t + ε(k) ≤ 1 + nε(k).

The last two steps come from the fact that X is a CSPRNG. This means that:
n − E[L(X)] ≤ 1 + nε(k) ⇒ E[− log P (X)] ≥ n − nε(k) − 1.

Since this is true for any P ∈ PT , taking the minimum yields:

HT (X) = HT (G(Un)) = min
P ∈PT

E[− log P (X)] ≥ n − nε(k) − 1.

39

A.2 Deterministic transformation can increase time bounded entropy and epiplexity

Theorem 18 Let G : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}n be a CSPRNG which admits advantage ε(k) and Uk
be the uniform distribution. HPoly(G(Uk)) > HPoly(Uk) + n − k − nε(k) − c for a fixed constant
c. Proof: see Appendix A.1.

Proof By Lemma 15 applied to the uniform distribution on {0, 1}k, there is an absolute constant c
such that

Hpoly(Uk) ≤ k + c.
Rearranging gives k ≥ Hpoly(Uk) − O(1). Combining this with the assumed CSPRNG lower bound
(Lemma 17),

Hpoly(G(Uk)) ≥ n − 2 − nε(k),

we obtain,

Hpoly(G(Uk)) − Hpoly(Uk) ≥ n − 2 − nε(k) − (k + c)
⇒HPoly(G(Uk)) > HPoly(Uk) + n − nε(k) − k − O(1).

A.3 CSPRNGs have low epiplexity

Theorem 19 Let X = Uk and n = ℓ(k) for CSPRNG G that admits advantange ε(n). Then,
for every polynomial time bound T (n), the epiplexity of Y = G(X) is,

ST (Y ) ≤ c + nε(k).

Proof We know from Theorem 17 that HT (G(Uk)) ≥ n − nε(k) − 2, which means:

ST (Y ) + HT (Y ) ≥ ST (Y ) + n − nε(k) − 2.

(19)

(20)

We also have from Lemma 15 that ST (Y ) + HT (Y ) ≤ n + c. Combining these two results yields:

ST (Y ) + n − nε(k) − 1 ≤ n + c ⇒ ST (Y ) ≤ c + nε(k).

(21)

A.4 Existence of High Epiplexity random variables

Definition 20 (Pseudorandom functions (PRF)) Let PRF be the class of keyed functions F :
{0, 1}k × {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m that are computable in polynomial time and satisfy the following property:
For any probabilistic polynomial-time distinguisher D with oracle access to the provided function,

| Pr
K∼Uk

[DFK (·)] − Pr
f ∼Fn

[Df (·)]|<

1
nc ,

(22)

for all integers c > 0 and sufficiently large n. Here, FK(·) denotes the function F (K, ·) with the key
K fixed, and Fn is the set of all functions mapping {0, 1}n to {0, 1}m.

40

Cryptographic assumptions. Assume one-way functions exist (secure against non-uniform PPT
adversaries with inversion probability at most ε(n)). By standard constructions (Håstad et al., 1999),
this implies the existence of PRFs secure against non-uniform PPT distinguishers with advantage
poly(ε(n)) (and in particular negligible if ε(n) is negligible).

Definition 21 (Heavy set) For a distribution Q on {0, 1}n, m < n, and a fixed threshold t ≥ 0,
the (Q, t)-heavy set is:

AQ,t := {z : Q(z) ≥ 2−2(m+t)}.

(23)

Lemma 22 Let P be a distribution on {0, 1}n with entropy H(P ) = m. If KL(P, Q) ≤ t,
then P (AQ,t) ≥ 1
2 .

Proof First, observe the standard inequality:

Ez∼P

(cid:20)

log

(cid:21)

1
Q(z)

= H(P ) + KL(P ∥Q) ≤ m + t.

Applying Markov’s inequality, we get:

(cid:20)

log

1
Q(z)

Pr
z∼P

(cid:21)

≥ 2(m + t)

≤

E[− log Q(z)]
2(m + t)

≤

1
2

.

Taking the complement gives:

(cid:20)

log

1
Q(z)

Pr
z∼P

(cid:21)

≤ 2(m + t)

= Pr
z∼P

Q(z) ≥ 2−2(m+t)(cid:105)
(cid:104)

= P (AQ,t) ≥

1
2

.

(24)

(25)

Lemma 23 Let Un be the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n, the weights of AQ,t under Un is
Un(AQ,t) ≤ 2−(n−2(m+t))

Proof For z ∼ Un, we have Ez∼Un [Q(z)] = (cid:80)

z 2−nQ(z) = 2−n. Applying Markov’ inequaltiy:

(cid:104)

Q(z) ≥ 2−2(m+t)(cid:105)

≤

Pr
z∼Un

Ez∼Un[Q(z)]
2−2(m+t)

≤ 2−n+2(m+t) = 2−(n−2(m+t)).

(26)

Theorem 24 If there exists a PRF family FK : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}k that is indexed by K ∈
{0, 1}m and secure against a non-uniform PPT distinguisher Dm allowing for an advantage
of at most ε(m), there exists n0 such that for all n = m + k ≥ n0, there exists a sequence of
k=1 over {0, 1}n such that SPoly(Xn) = Ω(log n).
random variables {Xk}n

Proof We will prove the existence of such P via a counting argument. First, we define the family of
distributions of interest. Concretely, we draw a sample PK as follows:

41

1. Sample x ∼ Um
2. Output z = (x, FK(x)) ∈ {0, 1}n

Since FK is a deterministic function, H(PK) = m.
We also defined a keyed model QK that models PK by directly storing the key K and the program
for generating PRF from K inside its program:

QK(x, y) = 2−m1{y = FK(x)}.
This model matches the density of PK so KL(PK∥QK) = 0, and:

L(QK, PK) = |QK|+H(PK) ≤ m + c1 + m = 2m + c1.
c1 is the constant overhead to implement the PRF evaluation and sampling wrapper under a fixed
encoding (i.e., a UTM).

Constructing distinguisher from Q. Given a model Q and its heavy set AQ,t (Definition 21),
we can turn Q into a single-query distinguisher DO:

1. Sample x ∼ Um and query the oracle y = O(x) and set z = (x, y).
2. Output 1 if z ∈ AQ,t i.e., Q(z) ≥ 2−2(m+t) else 0.

If O is a truly random function R, then (x, R(x)) follows Un and by Lemma 23:

Pr(cid:2)DR = 1(cid:3) = Pr
z∼Un

[z ∈ AQ,t] ≤ 2−(n−2(m+t))

If O is the PRF FK for a K that satisfies KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t, Lemma 22 gives:

Pr (cid:2)DFK = 1 | KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t(cid:3) ≥

1
2

.

(27)

(28)

Let pQ,t = PrK[KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t]. We can average over all possible K and obtain the following bound:

Pr (cid:2)DFK = 1(cid:3) ≥ Pr

[KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t] Pr (cid:2)DFK = 1 | KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t(cid:3) ≥

K

1
2

pQ,t.

Therefore, the distinguishing advantage of DO is:

Adv(DO) = Pr (cid:2)DFK = 1(cid:3) − Pr(cid:2)DR = 1(cid:3) ≥

1
2

pQ,t − 2−(n−2(m+t)).

Rearranging:

Since FK is a PRF and DO is a PPT distinguisher, the advantage is upperbounded by ε(m):

pQ,t ≤ 2Adv(DO) + 2 · 2−(n−2(m+t)).

pQ,t ≤ 2ε(m) + 2 · 2−(n−2(m+t)).

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

Union bound over short models. Given a maximum program length s, there are at most 2s+1
candidate programs Q with |Q|≤ s. Applying union bound on all such Q’s:
[∃Q : |Q|≤ s ∧ KL(PK∥Q) ≤ t] ≤ 2s+1pQ,t ≤ 2s+1 (cid:16)

2ε(m) + 2 · 2−(n−2(m+t))(cid:17)

(33)

.

Pr
K

Now, it suffices to choose parameters such that the RHS of equation 33 is smaller than 1, which
implies there exists a hard key K ⋆ such that:

KL(PK⋆ ∥Q) > t, ∀Q satisfying |Q|≤ s.

(34)

42

MDL lower bound from K ⋆. For K ⋆, every |Q|≤ s satisfies:

L(Q, PK⋆ ) = |Q|+H(P ⋆) + KL(PK⋆ ∥Q) ≥ H(P ⋆) + KL(PK⋆ ∥Q) ≥ m + t.

Meanwhile, the keyed model QK⋆ satisfies: L(QK⋆ , PK⋆ ) ≤ 2m + c1. If we set:

we get a margin of ∆:

t = m + c1 + ∆,

L(Q, PK⋆ ) ≥ m + m + c1 + ∆ > 2m + c1 ≥ L(QK⋆ , PK⋆ ).

(35)

This implies that there exists at least one model that achieves a lower description length than any Q
with |Q|≤ s and the MDL minimizer must have |Q⋆|> s.

Choosing parameters. Set:

• s = log m

• ∆ = log m

• t = m + c1 + ∆ = m + c1 + log m

• k = 4m + 4∆ + 2c1

We now plug these values into Equation 33. First, 2s+1 = poly(m) and limm→∞ 2s+1 · 2ε(m) = 0.
For the second term:

2s+1 · 2 · 2−(n−2(m+t))

=2log m+1 · 2 · 2−(m+4m+4∆+2c1−2(m+m+c1+log m))
=2log m+2 · 2−(5m+4 log m+2c1−2(2m+c1+log m))
=2log m+2 · 2−(m+2 log m)
=2−m−log m+2.

This term also approaches 0 as m increases. So for sufficiently large m the RHS of Equation 33 is
less than 1 as desired.

A.5 Information Content is not Independent of Factorization

Theorem 25 (OWP induces entropy asymmetry) Let f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n be a
polynomial-time computable one-way permutation secure against non-uniform PPT inverters
with negligible success probability. Let X = Un and Y = f (X). Let Hpoly(·) and Hpoly(· | ·)
be defined as in Definition 8. Then for every constant c > 0 there exists N such that for all
n ≥ N ,

Hpoly(X | Y ) + Hpoly(Y ) > Hpoly(Y | X) + Hpoly(X) + c log n.

Proof We prove bounds on each term.

43

Unconditional terms Hpoly(X) and Hpoly(Y ). Since X = Un and f is a permutation, Y = f (X)
is also uniform on {0, 1}n. By Lemma 15 (time-bounded entropy of the uniform distribution), there
is a constant c0 such that

In particular, −c0 ≤ Hpoly(Y ) − Hpoly(X) ≤ c0, so Hpoly(Y ) − Hpoly(X) = O(1).

n ≤ Hpoly(X) ≤ n + c0,

n ≤ Hpoly(Y ) ≤ n + c0.

Forward conditional term Hpoly(Y | X). There is a deterministic conditional sampler that
on input x outputs f (x). For this sampler, P (Y | X) = 1, hence log(1/P (Y | X)) = 0. Since
Hpoly(Y | X) is the expected log-loss of the MDL-optimal conditional sampler, we obtain

Hpoly(Y | X) = O(1).

Hard conditional term Hpoly(X | Y ). Let P ⋆ := P ⋆
bilistic model for X | Y over the class of non-uniform PPT model, and define

X|Y

be the MDL-optimal conditional proba-

ϕ(y) := Pr

u∼U∞

(cid:104)

SampleP ⋆

X|y

(cid:105)
(u) = f −1(y)

.

Because Y = f (X) and f is a permutation, we have X = f −1(Y ), and thus

P ⋆(X | Y ) = P ⋆(f −1(Y ) | Y ) = ϕ(Y )

a.s.

Therefore

(cid:104)
Hpoly(X | Y ) = E

log

1
P ⋆(X | Y )

(cid:105)

(cid:104)
= E

log

1
ϕ(Y )

(cid:105)

.

By Jensen’s inequality for the convex function log(1/t),

(cid:104)
E

log

(cid:105)

1
ϕ(Y )

≥ log

1
E[ϕ(Y )]

.

Now consider the inverter I that on input y runs the sampler P ⋆(X | Y ) once and outputs the
resulting x. Since P ⋆ is a non-uniform PPT sampler, I is a non-uniform PPT inverter. Moreover, its
inversion success probability is exactly

Equivalently (since Y = f (X)),

Pr(cid:2)I(Y ) = f −1(Y )(cid:3) = E[ϕ(Y )].

Pr
X∼Un

[I(f (X)) = X] = E[ϕ(Y )].

By one-wayness, this success probability is negligible. In particular, for every constant c > 0 there
exists N such that for all n ≥ N ,

Plugging into the Jensen bound yields, for all n ≥ N ,

E[ϕ(Y )] ≤ n−c.

Hpoly(X | Y ) ≥ log

1
E[ϕ(Y )]

≥ c log n.

Combine. For n ≥ N , we have

Hpoly(X | Y ) + Hpoly(Y ) ≥ c log n + Hpoly(Y )

where we used Hpoly(Y | X) = O(1) and Hpoly(Y ) − Hpoly(X) ≥ −c0.

≥ c log n + Hpoly(X) − O(1)
= Hpoly(Y | X) + Hpoly(X) + c log n − O(1),

(36)

(37)

(38)

44

Corollary 26 Let f be a one-way permutation and lef X = Unif({0, 1}n), Y = f (X). Define
P as a family of probabilistic generative model that allows for multiple factorizations of the
data, ie P ∈ P it can make predictions P1→2(X, Y ) = P1(X)P2(Y ; X) and P2→1(X, Y ) =
P2(Y )P1(X; Y ) for the functions P1(·), P1(· ; ·),P2(·), P2(· ; ·) that are normalized probability
distributions over the first variable.
Suppose that P fits the forward direction of f (and the input uniform distributions)

E[− log P1(X)] ≤ n + ε

E[− log P2(f (X) | X)] ≤ ε

then it must violate Bayes theorem P1→2 = P2→1 by a margin growing with n.
Specifically, for any value of c there exists N such that for all n > N , there exists at least one
x ∈ {0, 1}n such that

P1(x)P2(f (x); x) > nc2−2εP2(f (x))P1(x; f (x))

(39)

Proof From Theorem 25 which applies also for each P , we have

E [− log P2(X; Y )] > c log n.

The minimim value of E [− log P2(f (X))] is n since f is a bijection. Assembling these components,

(cid:20)

log

E

P1(X)P2(f (X); X)
P2(f (X))P1(X; f (X))

(cid:21)

> c log n − 2ε.

(40)

Since the inequality holds in expectation, it also must hold for at least one value of X. Exponentiating
provides the final result.

A.6 Problems with time-bounded sophistication

Epiplexity can be seen as a time-bounded and distributional generalization of sophistication. A
natural question is whether we can directly define a time-bounded version of sophistication for
individual strings. We show below that a naive time-bounded generalization degenerates: it makes
the “model” part essentially constant for every string.

Preliminaries. Fix a reference universal (prefix-free or plain) Turing machine U . For a program
p and auxiliary input d, we write U (p, d) for the output of running p on input d. The length of a
binary string p is denoted |p|. A program p is total if U (p, d) halts for every input d (i.e., p computes
a total function).

We write K(x) for Kolmogorov complexity (plain or prefix; the choice only changes values by O(1)).
For a time bound t(·), the time-bounded Kolmogorov complexity is

K t(x) := min{ |q| : U (q) outputs x within t(|x|) steps }.

(Any standard time-constructible t suffices for the discussion.)

We adopt the definition of sophistication from Koppel (1988) and Antunes et al. (2005), phrased for
finite strings as in later expositions. For a significance level c ≥ 0, the sophistication of x is

45

Definition 27 (Sophistication at significance c)

sophc(x) := min

p

(cid:110)

|p| : p is total and ∃d such that U (p, d) = x and |p|+|d|≤ K(x) + c

(cid:111)
.

Intuitively, (p, d) is a near-optimal two-part description of x. The requirement that p be total is
crucial: it prevents taking p to be a tiny universal interpreter and pushing all information into d
(since a universal interpreter is not total). One of the most intuitive attempts at “time-bounded
sophistication” is to simply replace K(x) by the time-bounded complexity K t(x) in Definition 27.

Definition 28 (Naive time-bounded sophistication) Fix a time bound t(·) and significance
level c ≥ 0. Define

sopht

c(x) := min

p

(cid:110)

|p| : p is total and ∃d such that U (p, d) = x and |p|+|d|≤ K t(x) + c

(cid:111)
.

The definition above collapses, essentially because time bounds make it easy to “totalize” a universal
interpreter by adding a timeout.

Lemma 29 (Naive time-bounded sophistication is O(1)) For every time bound t(·)
and every c ≥ 0, there exists a constant Ct (depending only on t and the choice of U )
such that for every string x,

sopht

c(x) ≤ Ct.

In particular, sopht
looking strings.

c(x) does not meaningfully distinguish structured strings from random-

Proof [sketch] Fix t. Let ptl be a constant-size program that, on input d, simulates U (d) for at most
t(|x|) steps (or more generally for the same time budget used in the definition of K t(x)), and: (i) if
the simulation halts within the budget, output the same result; otherwise (ii) output a fixed default
string (say 0). By construction, ptl is total (it always halts, because it enforces a timeout).
Now let d⋆ be a shortest program witnessing K t(x), i.e., |d⋆|= K t(x) and U (d⋆) outputs x within
the allowed time. Then U (ptl, d⋆) = x. Moreover,

|ptl|+|d⋆|= |ptl|+K t(x) ≤ K t(x) + c

for all c ≥ |ptl|.

Thus ptl is feasible in Definition 28, giving sopht

c(x) ≤ |ptl|= Ct for all x.

In the original (unbounded-time) Definition 27, totality prevents a universal interpreter from being
used as the “model” part, because such an interpreter cannot halt on inputs that encode non-halting
computations. However, once we commit to a time bound in the optimality criterion (i.e., we compare
against K t(x)), the data part d can be chosen to be a short program that is guaranteed to halt
quickly. A constant-size clocked interpreter ptl is then total and suffices for every x, pushing all of the
description length into d. This is precisely the sense in which the naive time-bounded generalization
becomes degenerate.

Appendix B. Measuring Epiplexity

B.1 Further details on estimating epiplexity

Here we provide further details on measuring epiplexity.

46

Evaluating code lengths and time bounds. As described in Section 4, evaluating the code
length for the model boils down to tracking the training losses (prequential) or teacher-student KL
(requential) at each step i :

|Ppreq| ≈

|Preq| ≈

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

(log 1/Pi(Zi) − log 1/PM (Zi)),

KL(P t

i ∥P s

i ).

(41)

(42)

For prequential coding, we need to compute the loss of the final model summed over the entire
training dataset, (cid:80)M −1
i=0 log 1/PM (Zi), which is time-consuming if done exactly. Since all of our
experiments are in the one-epoch training regime without data repeat and training data Zi are drawn
i.i.d. (except for the ADO experiment Section 6.4), we make the assumption that the generalization
gap is small and estimate (cid:80)M −1
i=0 log 1/PM (Zi) as M log 1/PM (ZM ), where the latter is a rescaled loss
for PM on unseen data ZM . The i.i.d. assumption breaks down for the ADO experiment Section 6.4,
where we instead compute (cid:80)M −1

i=0 log 1/PM (Zi) exactly.

For requential coding, we need to evaluate the teacher-student KL, KL(P t∥P s), at each training step.
The KL divergence over sequences decomposes as a sum over token positions and is estimated as:

KL(P t∥P s) =

≈

L
(cid:88)

j=1

L
(cid:88)

EZ<j ∼P t





(cid:88)

Zj ∈V

P t(Zj|Z<j) log

P t(Zj|Z<j)
P s(Zj|Z<j)





(cid:88)

P t(Z ′

j|Z<j) log

P t(Z ′
P s(Z ′

j|Z<j)
j|Z<j)

,

j=1

Z′

j ∈V

(43)

(44)

where Z ∼ P t is a sample from the teacher, L is the sequence length, and V is the vocabulary. We
evaluate this estimator using the sample Z generated by the teacher to train the student, along with
their next-token-prediction logits {P t(Zj|Z<j), P s(Zj|Z<j)}j recorded on the generated sequence
Finally, to estimate the expected entropy code length for the test data E[log 1/P (X)] under the
trained model P, we use an appropriately scaled empirical entropy code length of a heldout test set
ˆX. Let K and ˆK denote the number of examples in each dataset. Then:

E[log 1/P (X)] = E

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

log

(cid:81)

1
i P (Xi)
E[log 1/P (Xi)]

(cid:88)

=

i

= KE[log 1/P (X1)]

≈

K
ˆK

ˆK
(cid:88)

i=1

log 1/P ( ˆXi)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

where we assumed the datasets X and ˆX consist of i.i.d. draws from the same distribution. This
estimator is simply a scaled version of the standard empirical test loss, and it converges to the true
expectation as ˆK becomes large. To speedup evaluation, we typically choose ˆK ≪ K, but this choice
does not affect our time-bound calculation: for both prequential and requential coding, the total
decoding time of the two-part code for the test dataset X is estimated as 6N D + 2N D where N
is the number of parameters of the (student) model, D is the number of (student) training tokens,

47

Figure 10: Estimating the Pareto frontier from a finite number of training runs. While the exact
Pareto frontier is smooth and the optimal model size and training tokens increase smoothly with compute,
the empirical frontier is jagged and includes many spurious points due to selecting over only a finite number
of hyperparameter combinations. Replacing the empirical Pareto frontier with the lower convex hull and
retaining only the median point (ordered by compute) belong to a single training run with a fixed model
size results in a much more accurate estimate of the true Pareto frontier. The example training curves are
generated using the scaling laws in Hoffmann et al. (2022) and prequential coding. The exact frontier is
found via root finding for Equation (56).

and D is the number of tokens in the test dataset. When evaluating conditional epiplexity ST (Y |X),
decoding time takes into account both the input (X) and label (Y ) tokens, but code length only
needs to be computed for the label tokens (tokens contributing to the training loss).

Finding Hyperparameters for Compute-Optimal Two-Part Code. To identify models
that lead to compute-optimal two-part code, we need to optimize several key hyperparameters,
including model size (N ), training tokens (D), width-depth ratio, learning rate, etc. Through our
early experiments, we found two interventions that reduce the model code length under requential
coding: (1) distilling from an exponential moving average (EMA) of teacher checkpoints rather
than instantaneous checkpoints, which reduces noise in the distillation signal, and (2) imposing a
maximum KL threshold between teacher and student—when exceeded, the teacher is frozen while the
student catches up, preventing divergence that would otherwise inflate the code length. The EMA
time scale and the maximum KL threshold are additional hyperparameters for requential coding.

In each experiment, we first identify a good learning rate for a small model size and use the Maximum
Update Parameterization (Yang et al., 2022) and CompleteP (Dey et al., 2025) to transfer the found
learning rate to larger models. We also optimize the EMA time scale and maximum KL threshold for
the small model when using requential coding. We then train models of various depths and widths to
simultaneously sweep over model size and width-depth ratios, for a total number of training tokens
chosen to be larger than the test dataset size D, motivated by the observation that the optimal
training tokens typically grows with the model size but do not exceed D (see Section B.4). To avoid
separately training a model for intermediate training token budgets, we record an EMA of the iterates
(for requential coding, this is done for the student) under a constant learning rate schedule, rather
than using a decaying learning rate schedule, following Hägele et al. (2024). Each training run traces
a curve in the |P|+E[1/log P (X)] vs T plane as more training tokens are seen. The Pareto frontier
of all such curves yields the optimal hyperparameters (N, D, width, depth, etc.) as a function of the
compute budget.

Estimating the Pareto Frontier. Due to computational constraints, we can only sweep over a
limited set of hyperparameter combinations, which makes the empirical Pareto frontier noisy and
jagged; we therefore use the lower convex hull of the resulting curves as a smoother approximation
to the true Pareto frontier, a strategy often used in the compute-optimal scaling law literature

48

10161017Compute67|P|+Elog1/P(X)×10810161017Compute5678ST×10710161017Compute23456789Optimal Params×10710161017Compute5678Optimal Train Tokens×107Exact FrontierEmpirical FrontierLower Convex HullHull + Median per N(Henighan et al., 2020; McLeish et al., 2025) to overcome similar issues. After applying this strategy,
we still often observe that multiple checkpoints from a single training run appear on the Pareto
frontier. This is an artifact of finite hyperparameter sweeps: we expect both the optimal training
tokens D and model size N to vary smoothly with compute budget, precluding multiple values of D
at the same N from lying on the true Pareto frontier. These spurious points cause noisy, oscillatory
trends in the estimated epiplexity, as shown in Figure 10. As a simple workaround, we retain only
the median point (ordered by compute) per training run (which has a fixed model size) on the lower
convex hull.

In addition to the artifacts produced by finite (N, D) combinations, our
Sources of errors.
estimated epiplexity may differ from the true value for a few reasons: 1) potential systematic errors
introduced by using the lower convex hull and taking the median point, 2) using a fixed architecture
(e.g., the transformer) and learning algorithm (e.g., requential training with Adam) rather than
considering all possible programs, and 3) suboptimality of other hyperparameters, such as the learning
rate, Adam (β1, β2), etc. In most cases, we believe these sources of errors only contribute sub-leading
corrections to the estimated epiplexity that do not impact the result qualitatively. For example,
they are unlikely to alter the ordering between datasets if the estimated epiplexity gap is already
significant or there is a clear trend along some axis of variation (e.g., number of hidden bits in the
induction experiment in Section 5.3.1)

B.2 Prequential Coding Approximates Requential Coding with a Static Teacher

In this section, we show that the prequential coding estimate in Equation (8) can be viewed as an
approximation to requential coding with a static teacher, providing an alternative justification for its
use beyond the symmetry of information argument.

Consider requential coding with a fixed teacher across all time steps, i.e., P t
{0, . . . , M − 1}. The requential code length becomes

i = P t for all i ∈

|Preq|≈

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

KL(P t∥P s

i ) =

M −1
(cid:88)

(cid:20)

log

EP t

i=0

1
i (X)

P s

− log

(cid:21)

.

1
P t(X)

(49)

Now suppose the static teacher closely matches the true data distribution, i.e., P t ≈ PX1
(we use PX1
in order to refer to the distribution of a single example, not the dataset). Under this assumption, we
can make three simplifying approximations:

1. The expectation under the teacher can be replaced by the expectation under the data distribution:

EP t [·] ≈ EPX1

[·].

2. Training the student on synthetic samples from P t yields similar dynamics to training on real

data samples from PX1

.

3. If the student converges to the teacher, then P s

M ≈ P t, allowing us to estimate the teacher’s

loss EPX1

[log 1/P t(X)] by the final student’s loss EPX1

[log 1/P s

M (X)].

Applying these approximations, the requential code length with a static teacher becomes

|Preq| ≈

(cid:20)

log

EPX1

M −1
(cid:88)

i=0

1
i (X)

P s

− log

(cid:21)

,

1
M (X)

P s

(50)

49

which, when estimated empirically on real training data Z0, . . . , ZM −1 ∼ PX1
prequential estimate from Equation (8):

, recovers precisely the

|Ppreq| ≈

M −1
(cid:88)

(cid:18)

i=0

log

1
Pi(Zi)

− log

1
PM (Zi)

(cid:19)

.

(51)

This connection also lends some justification to treating 6N D as the decoding time for the model in
prequential coding, as it relates to a requential scheme that achieves this runtime. Since a static
teacher is generally suboptimal compared to the time-varying teachers used in full requential coding,
which can remain close to the student throughout training while still guiding it toward the target
distribution, we expect the prequential estimate to be an overestimate of the requential code length.
This is consistent with the empirical observations in Figure 2c, where the prequential estimate is
typically several times larger than the requential estimate.

B.3 A Solvable Model Using Scaling Laws

In this section, we present a simplified analytical model from combining neural scaling laws with
prequential coding to gain insight into how epiplexity and compute-optimal hyperparameters typically
vary with compute and dataset size, along with their asymptotic behaviors.

We adopt a standard scaling law for the loss as a function of model size N and training tokens D:

L(N, D) = E +

(cid:19)α

(cid:18) N0
N

+

(cid:18) D0
D

(cid:19)β

,

(52)

where E is the irreducible loss, N0 and D0 are scaling constants, and 0 < α, β < 1 are the scaling
exponents. The total compute for training and evaluating on D test tokens is T = 6N D + 2N D =
2N (3D + D).

To simplify the analysis, we work in natural units: n = N/N0, d = D/D0, δ = D/D0, and
t = T /(2N0D0). The loss becomes L(n, d) = E + n−α + d−β, and the compute constraint simplifies
to t = n(3d + δ).

Two-part code length. The two-part code Ptot consists of the model description and the data
encoded using the model. The data code length on the test set is δD0 · L(n, d).
For the model description length, we use the prequential estimate from Equation (8), which corresponds
to the area under the loss curve above the final loss6:

|Ppreq| =

=

(cid:19)−β

(cid:19)−β

D
(cid:88)

i=1
(cid:90) D

1

(cid:34)(cid:18) i
D0
(cid:34)(cid:18) u
D0

−

−

(cid:18) D
D0
(cid:18) D
D0

(cid:19)−β(cid:35)

(cid:19)−β(cid:35)

du + O(1),

(53)

where the O(1) term remains bounded as D → ∞. Evaluating the integral and dropping O(1) terms,
we obtain the expression valid for large D:

6. We start the sum and integral at 1 to avoid the singularity at 0, which is an artifact of the scaling law as it typically

only holds for large D.

|Ppreq| =

β
1 − β

D0 d1−β.

(54)

50

Optimality condition. Dropping the constant term δD0E from the two-part code length and
dividing by D0, we seek to minimize

f (n, d) =

β
1 − β

d1−β + δ(n−α + d−β)

(55)

subject to t = n(3d + δ).

Solution. Eliminating n using the constraint n = t/(3d + δ), we obtain a one-dimensional opti-
mization problem in d. Setting the derivative to zero and simplifying, the optimal d⋆(t) satisfies

with the corresponding optimal model size given by

βd−β−1(δ − d) = 3αδ t−α(3d + δ)α−1,

n⋆(t) =

t
3d⋆(t) + δ

.

(56)

(57)

While Equation (56) does not admit a simple closed-form solution in general, we can extract the
asymptotic behavior in the large- and small-compute regimes.

Large-compute regime (t → ∞). As t grows, the right-hand side of Equation (56) scales as
t−α → 0. For the equation to remain balanced, we require δ−d → 0, i.e., d⋆(t) → δ. The leading-order
scaling is therefore:

d⋆(t) = δ − Θ(t−α),

n⋆(t) ∼

t
4δ

.

(58)

In this regime, the optimal training set size saturates at the test set size δ, while the model size
grows linearly with compute. Correspondingly, the epiplexity saturates to

S∞(X) =

β
1 − β

D0 δ1−β =

β
1 − β

Dβ

0 D1−β.

For the entropy, we have (n⋆)−α → 0 while (d⋆)−β → δ−β, so

H∞(X) = D(cid:0)E + δ−β(cid:1) = DE + Dβ

0 D1−β.

(59)

(60)

The entropy approaches the irreducible entropy DE plus a residual term from finite training data
that scales sublinearly with the test set size, meaning that the achieved per-token loss is E + O(D−β).

Small-compute regime (d⋆ ≪ δ). When compute is limited such that d ≪ δ, we approximate
δ − d ≈ δ and (3d + δ)α−1 ≈ δα−1. Substituting into Equation (56) and solving for d gives

d⋆(t) =

(cid:19) 1

β+1

(cid:18) β
3α

α
β+1 δ

t

1−α
β+1 .

Since 3d⋆ ≪ δ in this regime, the optimal model size is

n⋆(t) ≈

t
δ

.

(61)

(62)

Here, the model size is constrained by the need to evaluate on δ tokens, and the optimal training set
size grows sublinearly with compute as d⋆ ∝ tα/(β+1). The epiplexity in this regime scales as

ST (X) =

β
1 − β

D0 (d⋆)1−β ∝ T

α(1−β)
β+1

,

(63)

51

growing sublinearly with compute.

For the entropy, both the model and data contributions are significant. The model contribution
scales as

D(n⋆)−α = D

(cid:19)α

(cid:18) δ
t

∝ T −α,

while the data contribution scales as

D(d⋆)−β ∝ T − αβ
β+1 .

(64)

(65)

Since αβ/(β + 1) < α, the data term decays more slowly and dominates for larger t within this
regime. The entropy above the irreducible level is thus

HT (X) − DE ∝ T − αβ
β+1 ,

(66)

decaying as a power law with compute.

For typical scaling exponents (e.g., α ≈ 0.34 and β ≈ 0.28 from Hoffmann et al. (2022)), the epiplexity
grows as ST ∝ T 0.19 and the entropy decays as HT − DE ∝ T −0.07 in the small-compute regime.

B.4 How Epiplexity and Time-Bounded Entropy Scale with Compute and Dataset Size

In this section, we analyze how epiplexity and time-bounded entropy scale with compute budget and
dataset size under natural assumptions about neural network training, without relying on specific
functional forms for scaling laws. The goal is to provide some general intuitions for how these
quantities are expected to vary as a function of the compute budget and dataset size. Section B.3
explicitly demonstrates using scaling laws and prequential coding that (1) epiplexity grows with both
compute and dataset size, and (2) for a fixed X, epiplexity saturates to a finite value in the limit of
infinite compute—specifically, to the amount of information acquired by an arbitrarily large model
trained on a training set of the same size as the test set X, while time-bounded entropy decays to
the loss achievable by an infinitely large model on this training set. Here, we show that similar or
weaker statements hold more generally, requiring only a few natural assumptions about the effect of
increasing model size N and training data size D. These assumptions capture typically observed
regularities in deep learning, such as the smoothly diminishing returns in scaling only model size
while holding training set size fixed, but they may fail to capture rare exceptions like grokking and
sudden improvement in performance above certain compute thresholds (as in Section 5.3.2).

Denote the code length for an N -parameter model trained on D tokens as |P|(N, D), the per-token
loss it achieves as L(N, D), the compute-optimal model size as N ⋆(T ) and training data size as
D⋆(T ), so that ST (X) = |P|(N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T )) and HT (X) = D L(N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T )). We establish the
following results as we vary T and D = |X|, fixing the distribution of Xi (only the dataset size
changes):

• Monotonicity of N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T ), ST (X), and HT (X) (Section B.4.1): Under natural as-
sumptions on the effect of increasing N and D, the compute-optimal model size N ⋆(T ) and
training data size D⋆(T ) are both increasing in the compute budget T . As a result, epiplexity
typically grows with T while time-bounded entropy typically decreases with T .

• Monotonicity of S∞(X) and H∞(X) in D (Section B.4.2): In the infinite-compute limit,
epiplexity S∞(X) is nondecreasing in D = |X|, while the per-token time-bounded entropy
h∞(XD) := H∞(XD)/D is nonincreasing in D.

52

• D⋆(T ) generally approaches D in prequential coding (Section B.4.3): For prequential
coding, the compute-optimal training set size satisfies D⋆(T ) → D as T → ∞, where D is the
test set size, without assuming the scaling law form. Combined with monotonicity of D⋆(T ),
this implies D⋆(T ) ↑ D from below.

B.4.1 Monotonicity of N ∗(T ), D∗(T ), ST (X), and HT (X)

The following theorem shows that the compute-optimal model size and training data size are both
monotonically increasing in the compute budget under natural assumptions.

Theorem 30 (Monotone growth of compute-optimal N and D) Define the effective
data (cid:101)D = 6D + 2D, so that the compute constraint becomes T = N (cid:101)D. Let J(N, (cid:101)D) denote
the two-part code length as a function of model size N and effective data (cid:101)D, and assume J is
twice continuously differentiable. Consider the constrained MDL problem

min
N >0, (cid:101)D≥2D

J(N, (cid:101)D)

s.t.

N (cid:101)D = T.

(67)

Assume that for each T in the regime of interest there is a unique interior optimizer
(N ⋆(T ), (cid:101)D⋆(T )) with (cid:101)D⋆(T ) > 2D and N ⋆(T ) (cid:101)D⋆(T ) = T .
Work in logarithmic coordinates µ := log N and ν := log (cid:101)D, and by slight abuse of notation
write J(µ, ν) = J(eµ, eν). Assume that for all such T , the following conditions hold at the
corresponding optimum (µ⋆(T ), ν⋆(T )):

1. Complementarity (larger models are more sample-efficient):

∂2J
∂µ∂ν

≤ 0.

2. Diminishing returns in model size (in log coordinates):

∂2J
∂µ2 > 0.

3. Diminishing returns in effective data (in log coordinates):

∂2J
∂ν2 > 0.

Then both compute-optimal choices are strictly increasing functions of T :

T2 > T1 =⇒ N ⋆(T2) > N ⋆(T1) and

(cid:101)D⋆(T2) > (cid:101)D⋆(T1).

Proof Work in logarithmic coordinates

µ := log N,

ν := log (cid:101)D,

τ := log T.

The compute constraint N (cid:101)D = T becomes the affine constraint

µ + ν = τ

⇐⇒

ν = τ − µ.

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

(73)

By slight abuse of notation, write J(µ, ν) := J(eµ, eν) and denote its partial derivatives by
Jµ, Jν, Jµµ, Jνν, Jµν, etc., all taken with respect to the log-coordinates (µ, ν).

53

Define the restricted objective along the compute frontier by

f (µ, τ ) := J(µ, τ − µ).

(74)

For each τ in the regime of interest, let µ⋆(τ ) denote the unique interior minimizer of f (·, τ ), and set
ν⋆(τ ) := τ − µ⋆(τ ).

Holding τ fixed and differentiating f with respect to µ gives

fµ(µ, τ ) =

∂
∂µ

J(µ, τ − µ)

= Jµ(µ, ν) + Jν(µ, ν)

∂
∂µ

(τ − µ)

= Jµ(µ, ν) − Jν(µ, ν),

where ν = τ − µ. The optimality condition for µ⋆(τ ) is therefore

fµ(µ⋆(τ ), τ ) = 0

⇐⇒

Jµ(µ⋆(τ ), ν⋆(τ )) = Jν(µ⋆(τ ), ν⋆(τ )).

Differentiating the identity fµ(µ⋆(τ ), τ ) = 0 with respect to τ yields

0 =

d
dτ

fµ(µ⋆(τ ), τ ) = fµµ(µ⋆(τ ), τ )

dµ⋆
dτ

+ fµτ (µ⋆(τ ), τ ).

Assuming fµµ(µ⋆(τ ), τ ) ̸= 0 (verified below), we obtain

dµ⋆
dτ

= −

fµτ
fµµ

evaluated at (µ, τ ) = (µ⋆(τ ), τ ).

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

We now express fµτ and fµµ in terms of second partial derivatives of J. From (75) and the chain
rule, using ∂τ (τ − µ) = 1,

fµτ (µ, τ ) =

∂
∂τ

(Jµ(µ, ν) − Jν(µ, ν))

= Jµν(µ, ν)

∂ν
∂τ
= Jµν(µ, ν) − Jνν(µ, ν),

− Jνν(µ, ν)

∂ν
∂τ

(79)

with ν = τ − µ. Similarly, differentiating (75) with respect to µ while holding τ fixed, and using
∂µ(τ − µ) = −1 together with symmetry Jνµ = Jµν, yields

fµµ(µ, τ ) =

(Jµ(µ, ν) − Jν(µ, ν))

∂
∂µ
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

=

Jµµ(µ, ν) + Jµν(µ, ν)

∂ν
∂µ
= (Jµµ − Jµν) − (Jµν − Jνν)
= Jµµ(µ, ν) + Jνν(µ, ν) − 2Jµν(µ, ν).

−

Jνµ(µ, ν) + Jνν(µ, ν)

Substituting (79)–(80) into (78) gives

dµ⋆
dτ

= −

Jµν − Jνν
Jµµ + Jνν − 2Jµν

=

Jνν − Jµν
Jµµ + Jνν − 2Jµν

,

54

(cid:19)

∂ν
∂µ

(80)

(81)

with all second partial derivatives of J evaluated at (µ, ν) = (µ⋆(τ ), ν⋆(τ )).
By the assumptions Jνν > 0 and Jµν ≤ 0 at the optimum, the numerator in (81) satisfies Jνν −Jµν > 0.
By the assumptions Jµµ > 0, Jνν > 0, and Jµν ≤ 0, the denominator satisfies Jµµ + Jνν − 2Jµν > 0.
Hence

dµ⋆
dτ

> 0.

Since ν⋆(τ ) = τ − µ⋆(τ ), we also have

dν⋆
dτ

= 1 −

dµ⋆
dτ

=

Jµµ − Jµν
Jµµ + Jνν − 2Jµν

> 0,

(82)

(83)

where positivity follows from Jµµ > 0 and Jµν ≤ 0 together with the same positive denominator.
Finally, N ⋆(T ) = exp(µ⋆(log T )) and (cid:101)D⋆(T ) = exp(ν⋆(log T )), so dµ⋆/dτ > 0 and dν⋆/dτ > 0 imply
that both N ⋆(T ) and (cid:101)D⋆(T ) are strictly increasing functions of T .

Empirical plausibility of the assumptions. The three conditions in Theorem 30 reflect well-
documented empirical phenomena in deep learning. The complementarity condition ∂2J/∂µ∂ν ≤ 0
captures the observation that larger models are more sample-efficient: increasing model size leads to
faster learning (Kaplan et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022), which leads to a faster decrease in both the
model description length and data code length (final loss), and thus ∂J/∂ν should decrease with
µ. The diminishing returns conditions ∂2J/∂µ2 > 0 and ∂2J/∂ν2 > 0 simply state that there is
diminishing return in successive doubling of the model size or training data size, holding the other
quantity fixed.

Asymptotic growth of ST and monotone decay of HT . The monotone growth of the compute-
optimal N ⋆(T ) and D⋆(T ) does not by itself imply that ST (X) := |P|(N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T )) is monotone
for all T . Intuitively, while we expect the model description length |P|(N, D) to grow with D, it need
not increase with N : larger models can be more sample-efficient, which may reduce the effective
complexity of the learned predictor under some coding schemes. However, one should still expect
ST (X) to grow with T , at least asymptotically, if we assume (1) the compute-optimal model size
diverges while the optimal training horizon converges, as in the scaling-law model of Section B.3,
and (2) the existence of infinite-model-size limits of the training dynamics.

That is, assume that along the compute-optimal path,

N ⋆(T ) → ∞ and

D⋆(T ) → D∞ < ∞ as T → ∞.

(84)

Assume moreover that for bounded training horizons, the description length admits a well-defined
infinite-model-size limit: there exists a function |P|∞(D) such that for each fixed D,

|P|(N, D) → |P|∞(D)

as N → ∞.

(85)

This assumption is motivated by the existence of infinite-width and depth limits of neural networks
under appropriate parameterizations (Yang and Littwin, 2023; Dey et al., 2025), where scalar
quantities such as loss and teacher–student KL divergence that determine |P|(N, D) admit stable
large-model limits for bounded training durations. Under these conditions, any non-monotonic
dependence of |P| on N is a finite-model effect; once N ⋆(T ) is large enough, |P|(N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T )) is
well-approximated by the limiting curve |P|∞(D⋆(T )). Since D⋆(T ) is monotone increasing and
convergent under our earlier assumptions, the large-T behavior of ST (X) is therefore governed

55

primarily by the behavior of D⋆(T ) alone, which we have shown is increasing with T , so one expects
ST (X) to increase at large T as |P|∞(D) should increase with D.
For the entropy term HT (X) := D L(N ⋆(T ), D⋆(T )), the conclusion is simpler and does not require
taking N → ∞. Assume only that the loss L(N, D) is nonincreasing in both N and D (more data
and parameters cannot make the loss worse). Since N ⋆(T ) and D⋆(T ) are increasing in T , we have

T2 > T1 =⇒ L(N ⋆(T2), D⋆(T2)) ≤ L(N ⋆(T1), D⋆(T1)),
and therefore HT (X) is nonincreasing in T . In particular, whenever HT (X) has a finite large-compute
limit H∞(X), it approaches this limit from above.

(86)

B.4.2 Monotonicity of S∞(X) and H∞(X) in D

We now show that epiplexity and time-bounded entropy (after appropriate normalization) in the
infinite-compute limit are monotonic in the test set size D = |X|, regardless of the coding scheme.
Fix a dataset XD of length D tokens. For a two-part code of the form

let (N ⋆

T (D), D⋆

T (D)) denote the compute-optimal choices. We write

J(N, D; D) = |P|(N, D) + D L(N, D),

T (D), D⋆
T (D), D⋆

T (D)),
T (D)),

ST (XD) := |P|(N ⋆
HT (XD) := D L(N ⋆
HT (XD)
D

hT (D) :=

= L(N ⋆

T (D), D⋆

T (D)).

(87)

(88)

(89)

(90)

In the infinite-compute limit T → ∞, the compute constraint becomes irrelevant, so the limiting
quantities coincide with the optimum of the unconstrained problem

(N ⋆

∞(D), D⋆

∞(D)) = arg min

N >0, D≥0

|P|(N, D) + D L(N, D).

Thus

S∞(XD) = |P|(N ⋆

∞, D⋆

∞),

h∞(XD) = L(N ⋆

∞, D⋆

∞).

(91)

(92)

We claim that S∞(XD) is nondecreasing in D, and h∞(XD) is nonincreasing in D, assuming that for
each D > 0 the unconstrained problem (91) admits at least one minimizer.
To see this, fix D2 > D1 and let (Ni, Di) be minimizers of (91) at D = Di. Write Pi := |P|(Ni, Di)
and Li := L(Ni, Di). Optimality of (N2, D2) at D2 implies

Optimality of (N1, D1) at D1 implies

Adding (93) and (94) gives

P2 + D2L2 ≤ P1 + D2L1.

P1 + D1L1 ≤ P2 + D1L2.

(P2 + D2L2) + (P1 + D1L1) ≤ (P1 + D2L1) + (P2 + D1L2)
D2L2 + D1L1 ≤ D2L1 + D1L2

(D2 − D1)(L2 − L1) ≤ 0,

(93)

(94)

(95)

hence L2 ≤ L1 since D2 > D1, i.e., the achieved loss h∞(XD) is nonincreasing in D. Substituting
L2 ≤ L1 back into (94) yields P2 ≥ P1, i.e., S∞(XD) is nondecreasing in D.

56

B.4.3 D⋆(T ) Generally Approaches D in Prequential Coding

We now show that the compute-optimal training set size for prequential coding generically saturates
at D = D as T → ∞, without assuming specific scaling laws.

In continuous time, the prequential model description length is the area above the final loss:

|Ppreq(N, D)| :=

(cid:90) D

0

(L(N, u) − L(N, D)) du.

The corresponding two-part code length for a test set of size D is

Jpreq(N, D; D) = |Ppreq(N, D)| +D L(N, D)

=

(cid:90) D

0

L(N, u) du + (D − D) L(N, D).

We express N in terms of D for fixed T using the constraint 6N D + 2N D = T :

NT (D) =

T
6D + 2D

.

(96)

(97)

(98)

Large-compute limit. Assume: (i) L(N, D) is nonincreasing in N and admits a pointwise infinite-
model-size limit L∞(D) := limN→∞ L(N, D);7 (ii) L∞ is continuously differentiable and strictly
∞(D) < 0. Along the compute frontier (98), for any fixed D we have NT (D) → ∞
decreasing, i.e., L′
as T → ∞, hence

Jpreq(NT (D), D; D) → J∞(D) :=

(cid:90) D

0

L∞(u) du + (D − D) L∞(D).

(99)

Differentiating gives

∞(D) = (D − D) L′
J ′

∞(D).

(100)

Since L′
∞(D) < 0, we have J ′
minimized at D = D, implying

∞(D) < 0 for D < D and J ′

∞(D) > 0 for D > D. Thus J∞ is uniquely

D⋆(T ) → D

as T → ∞.

(101)

Approach from below and linear growth of N ⋆(T ). By Theorem 30, under the complementarity
and diminishing-returns assumptions, the compute-optimal training set size D⋆(T ) is strictly increasing
in T . Combined with the convergence D⋆(T ) → D, this yields D⋆(T ) ↑ D, i.e., D⋆(T ) approaches D
from below. Finally, since N ⋆(T ) = NT (D⋆(T )),

N ⋆(T ) =

T
6D⋆(T ) + 2D

∼

T
8D

,

(102)

so the compute-optimal model size grows linearly with T in the large-compute regime.

7. This limit provably exists under µP, but is a reasonable assumption in general as it simply asserts diminishing

returns in scaling model size without increasing data.

57

Appendix C. Experiment Details

Unless otherwise stated, we use the GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) transformer architecture trained
with Adam optimizer. In experiments where we vary the model size, we tune the base learning rate
on a small model and transfer it to larger models using using µP (Yang et al., 2022) and CompleteP
(Dey et al., 2025). In µP, the per-layer learning rate is base learning rate divided by the input
dimension, so our reported base learning rate is larger than typical learning rates used for Adam.
The hyperparameters presented below are shared between the teacher and the student for requential
coding (width, depth, learning rate, EMA time scale, etc.). As described in Section B.1, the EMA
for the teacher is used only for producing the distillation target and does not alter the raw teacher
training dynamics, while the EMA for the student model does alter its training dynamics and is used
to replace a decaying learning rate schedule.

C.1 ECA

In Figure 3, we train the transformer to predict Y given X where X is the initial state with a state
size of 64 cells and Y is obtained by evolving X for 48 steps. We apply a burnin period of 1000
steps for sampling the initial state X to eliminate the less uninteresting transient dynamics from
random initialization. That is X is obtained by evolving the ECA on Z for 1000 steps where Z is
a uniform random initial state. For each rule, we train models with width (embedding dimension)
∈ {16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512} and depth (number of transformer blocks) ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6, 9}. We train both
teacher and student using batches of 1536 sequences (each an (X, Y ) pair), a base learning rate of 0.03
with 100 warmup steps, and an EMA time scale of 50 steps (half-life divided by ln(2)). We did not
set a max teacher-student KL as the student smoothly trackes the teacher throughout training. The
epiplexity and time-bounded entropy is estimated for a test set of size D = 100M tokens (counting Y
only).

C.2 Easy induction

For this task, we use a sequence length of n = 512 (as described in Section 5.3.1). The model has
3 layers and a width of 128, and is trained with a learning rate of 0.03 and a batch size of 384
sequences for 3000 steps with 15 warmup steps and an EMA time scale of 50 steps. We found further
increasing the model size led to negligible improvement in the loss, and Figure 5c shows that the
model has nearly converged by the end of training to the theoretical minimum loss, so there is no
need to further increase the training data. As a result, we expect the epiplexity ST (X) to stabilize as
T and D = |X| increases (in the relevant regime where T is still much less than what is required for
implementing the brute-force solution that enumerates all possible combinations of hidden entries in
the transition matrix), and our estimated epiplexity approximates this stabilized value.

C.3 Hard induction

We modify the ECA experiment in Section C.1 to remove the first h ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 5} bits in X when
fed to the model as input. We use a state size of 32, batch size of 1536 sequences, learning of 0.03,
EMA time scale of 100 steps. We set the max KL threshold between the teacher and student as 0.03
(nats per token). To construct a forward function that is hard to invert, we use rule 30 iterated for
4 steps. We train models with 3 layers and width 256 for 20000. Further increasing model size or
training data led to no improvement in the loss. As Figure 5b shows, the models converge by the end
of training (the loss curves shown are for the student models, but the teacher models also converge)
to the theoretical minimum values. Therefore, like the case for Section C.2, we expect the epiplexity

58

ST (X) to stabilize as T and D = |X| increases, at least in the relevant regime where T is still much
less than what is required for implementing the brute-force solution that enumerates all possible
combinations of hidden bits, and our estimated epiplexity approximates this stabilized value.

C.4 Chess

We train models of varying sizes from 1M to 160M parameters with depth between 3 and 24 layers.
The base learning rate is set to 2 and the batch size is 256, with a sequence length of 512. We set the
EMA time scale to 50 steps and max KL to 0.1 nats per token. We use character-level tokenization.
The teacher models are trained for 5B tokens in total, and the student models are trained for slightly
more due to hitting the max KL threshold during training. The test set size is set to 5B tokens.

Pre-Training Data. We use the Lichess dataset available on Hugging Face at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/Lichess/standard-chess-games as pre-training data, formatted as either "<board>|<moves>"
or "<moves>|<board>", where moves are in algebraic chess notation and board is the final board
state in FEN notation. We use a slightly more concise version of the algebraic notation to further
compress the move sequence. An example input where the board appears last is:

e4,e5;Nf3,Nc6;Bb5,a6;Ba4,Nf6;O-O,Be7;Re1,b5;Bb3,d6;c3,O-O;h3,Nb8;d4,Nbd7;
|r1bq1rk1/2pnbppp/p2p1n2/1p2p3/3PP3/1BP2N1P/PP3PP1/RNBQR1K1 w - - 0 10

For downstream evaluation, we evaluate performance on the following two datasets after fine-tuning
on 50k examples for a 10M-parameter model with depth 24. We report accuracy under greedy
decoding at zero temperature.

Chess Puzzles. We use puzzles from the Lichess puzzle database available at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/EleutherAI/lichess-puzzles, filtering for puzzles with difficulty rating above 2000.
The task is to predict the correct move sequence given the game context. Puzzles are formatted as
move sequences where the model must predict the next optimal move, following (Burns et al., 2023),
with only the target moves included in the loss computation via masking. This tests the model’s
ability to recognize tactical patterns and calculate forced sequences.

Centipawn Evaluation. We evaluate position understanding using the Lichess chess position eval-
uations dataset at https://huggingface.co/datasets/Lichess/chess-position-evaluations,
where models classify positions into 9 evaluation buckets based on Stockfish centipawn (cp) scores:
class 0 (≤ −800cp), class 1 (−800 to −400cp), class 2 (−400 to −200cp), class 3 (−200 to −50cp),
class 4 (−50 to +50cp), class 5 (+50 to +200cp), class 6 (+200 to +400cp), class 7 (+400 to +800cp),
and class 8 (≥ +800cp). Examples are formatted as "<board>|<class>" where the model predicts
the evaluation class, with mate positions assigned to the extreme classes (0 or 8). Loss during
fine-tuning is computed only for predicting the class.

C.5 OpenWebText

We use the OpenWebText dataset at https://huggingface.co/datasets/Skylion007/openwebtext,
keeping only documents containing only 96 common alphanumeric symbols, and apply character-level
tokenization. The setup is otherwise identical to the chess experiment (Section C.4).

59

C.6 CIFAR-5M

We use the CIFAR-5M dataset at https://github.com/preetum/cifar5m. We convert the 32×32×3
images to greyscale and flatten to a 1D sequence of 1024 in raster-scan order. The vocabulary is
the set of pixel intensities {0, . . . , 255}. The setup is otherwise identical to the chess experiment
(Section C.4).

C.7 Prequential vs Requential Comparison

ECA. The ECA experiment include rules {0, 32, 4, 15, 22, 30, 41, 54, 106, 110}, covering all 4 classes.
We train models with width ∈ {16, 32, 64, 128} and depth ∈ {1, 2, 3} up to 10000 steps. We use a base
learning rate of 0.03 and batch size of 384. Other hyperparameters are identical to Section C.1. We
set D = 250M tokens. For each rule, we report the maximum epiplexity over the resulting compute
range.

Induction. Both the easy and hard induction results directly come from the experiments in
Section 5.3.1. As explained in Section C.2 and Section C.3, the compute budget T and test set size
D need not be precisely specified for these two tasks as the epiplexity stabilizes as T and D increase
due to the convergent training dynamics.

Natural data. We report the estimated epiplexity on each dataset at the maximum tested compute
budget as described in Section C.4, Section C.5, and Section C.6.

C.8 ECA Emergence

We modify the setup in Section C.1 to include models that predict intermediate states and the final
state rather than the final state directly. Let X (0) denote the initial ECA state, and X (s) denote
it evolved for s steps. For an ℓ-loop model, we train the model to predict (X (∆), X (2∆), . . . , X (t))
instead of X (t) only, where ∆ = t/ℓ. Its marginal probability on the final state is lower-bounded by
its joint probability on the ground truth trajectory:

P (X (t)) =

(cid:88)

P(X ′(∆), . . . , X ′(t−∆), X (t))

(103)

So we upper-bound its NLL as

X ′(∆),...,X ′(t−∆)

log

1
P (X (t))

≤ log

=

ℓ
(cid:88)

k=1

1
P(X (∆), . . . , X (t))

log

1
P(X (k∆) | X ((k−1)∆), . . . , X (∆))

,

(104)

We account for the intermediate tokens when computing the time bound and the code length (they
contribute to the model code length as well as the data entropy code length). In the experiment, we
set the ECA steps to t = 64. We train models with width {16, 32, 64, 128}, depth ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32},
and number of loops ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}. We found ℓ ∈ {2, 4, 8} has no advantage over the non-looped
model (ℓ = 1) in terms of the two-part code, only ℓ = 16 does. We therefore refer to ℓ = 1 as
non-looped and ℓ = 16 as looped. The fact that a small ℓ > 1 is not helpful is likely because the
overhead of encoding and generating intermediate states exceeds the savings from only slightly
simplifying each prediction step, as the per-step prediction horizon is still significant. We train all
models with a base learning rate of 0.06, batch size of 147456 tokens, warmup of 100 steps, and
EMA time scale of 50 steps. We did not set a max teacher-student KL. The test set size is set to
D = 100M final state tokens.

60

C.9 Scaling Laws

We estimate epiplexity and time-bounded entropy using the expressions derived in Section B.3 for
prequential coding using existing scaling laws for L(N, D). We solve for the optimal training tokens
D⋆(T ) as a function of compute using root finding for Equation (56). For language, we use the
Chinchilla scaling laws from Hoffmann et al. (2022), which were fit to total parameter counts. For
all other modalities (images and video), we use the scaling laws from Henighan et al. (2020), which
follow the methodology of Kaplan et al. (2020) and report non-embedding parameter counts. We
correct these to use total parameters following Pearce and Song (2024), as described below.

Correcting for embedding parameters. The scaling laws in Kaplan et al. (2020) and Henighan
et al. (2020) are reported in terms of non-embedding parameters N\E and non-embedding compute
C\E, excluding embedding and unembedding parameters. As shown by Pearce and Song (2024),
this choice—combined with smaller model scales—accounts for much of the discrepancy between
the Kaplan and Chinchilla scaling laws. Following their approach, we relate total parameters N to
non-embedding parameters via

N = N\E + ωN 1/3
\E ,

ω = (V + Lctx)

(cid:19)1/3

,

(cid:18) A
12

(105)

where V is the vocabulary size, Lctx is the context length, and A is the aspect ratio (width/depth).
We use A = 5 as Henighan et al. (2020) showed the optimal aspect ratio is around this value for
non-language datasets. We generate points (C\E, N\E, L) from the original scaling laws, convert
to (C, N, L) using this relation (with total compute as C = C\E · N/N\E), and refit the power-law
exponents and the irreducible loss.

Parameterization conversion. The scaling laws in Henighan et al. (2020) are reported in
compute-centric form, expressing the optimal loss L⋆(C) = (C/C0)−γ + E and optimal model size
N ⋆(C) = (C/ ˆC)δ as functions of compute budget C. We convert these to the (N, D) parameterization
used in this work:

L(N, D) =

(cid:19)−α

(cid:18) N
N0

(cid:19)−β

+

(cid:18) D
D0

+ E,

(106)

where the exponents transform as α = γ/δ and β = γ/(1 − δ), and the token scale is given by
D0 = ˆC

(β/α)−1/β.

6 N α/β

0

Corrected parameters. Table 1 presents the corrected scaling law parameters used in our final
calculations.

Table 1: Final scaling law parameters used. Image and video domains from Henighan et al. (2020)
are corrected for embedding parameters using aspect ratio A = 5 following (Pearce and Song, 2024);
Chinchilla (language) from Hoffmann et al. (2022) was originally fit to total parameter counts and
requires no correction. D0 is measured in tokens and E is measured in nats.

Domain

Image 8×8
Image 16×16
Image 32×32
Image VQ 16×16
Image VQ 32×32
Video VQ 163
Language (Chinchilla)

α

0.331
0.307
0.258
0.322
0.287
0.428
0.339

N0
8.0 × 101
2.8 × 102
6.3 × 101
2.7 × 104
1.9 × 104
3.7 × 104
4.91 × 107

D0
2.66 × 106
8.94 × 107
1.95 × 106
4.44 × 107
1.63 × 108
1.79 × 108
1.49 × 109

E

3.14
2.68
2.30
4.23
3.32
1.15
1.69

β

0.566
0.820
0.399
0.441
0.560
0.718
0.285

61

Appendix D. RASP-L for Elementary Cellular Automata

Below we provide RASP-L code (Zhou et al., 2023) demonstrating how the evolution rule of an ECA
can be implemented, providing evidence that the solution can be expressed within an autoregressive
transformer model.

Listing 1: RASPL implementation of a cellular automaton evolution step

from np_rasp import *

def int2bits (x , bits =8) : # returns LSB first

" " " Helper function to generate fixed bitstring representing a number .
Not RASP -L , can be assumed constant . " " "
bits_str = bin ( x ) [2:]. zfill ( bits )
return np . array ( list ( map ( int , bits_str [:: -1]) ) , dtype = np . uint8 )

sep = -1
sep2 = -2
def evolve_ca (x , rule ) :

" " " Function to autoregressively output produce the output of one step of the ECA
rule . Problem encoded as x = -- input state - - , sep , sep2 , - - output state - -.

# only valid after sep

Rule : int ( specifying the ECA ) " " "
lookup = int2bits ( rule , 8)
in_input = 1 - has_seen (x , full (x , sep ) )
in_input2 = 1 - has_seen (x , full (x , sep2 ) )
width = cumsum ( in_input )
idx = indices ( x )
circ_x = where ( in_input , x , index_select (x , idx - width ) )
prev = shift_right (x , 1)
cprev = where ( in_input2 , prev , index_select ( prev , idx - width ) )
prev2 = shift_right (x , 2)
nbhd = ( prev2 << 2) + ( cprev << 1) + circ_x
sh ift ed_ nex tst at e = lookup [ nbhd ]
to_select_idx = idx - width
to_select_idx = where ( to_select_idx < 3 , idx , to_select_idx )
outstate = index_select ( shifted_nextstate , to_select_idx )
return outstate

Appendix E. Cellular Automata and Game of Life

Elementary cellular automata Elementary cellular automata (ECA) (Wolfram and Gad-el Hak,
2003) are one-dimensional cellular automata defined on a finite or infinite line of cells, each in one of
two states: 0 or 1. The system evolves in discrete time steps according to local rules: a cell’s next
state depends only on its current state and those of its two immediate neighbors, yielding 23 = 8
possible neighborhood configurations. Since each configuration can map to either 0 or 1, there are
28 = 256 possible rules, conventionally numbered 0–255 using Wolfram’s notation, where the rule
number’s binary representation specifies the output for each neighborhood. Despite their simplicity,
ECAs exhibit diverse behaviors ranging from trivial (e.g., Rule 0) to complex and chaotic (e.g., Rule
30), with Rule 54 proven to be Turing-complete. These systems serve as minimal models for studying
emergence, computation, and the relationship between local rules and global behavior.

Conways Game of Life Conway’s Game of Life (Gardner, 1970) is a cellular automaton defined
on an infinite two-dimensional grid of cells, each in one of two states: alive (1) or dead (0). The
system evolves in discrete time steps according to deterministic local rules: a cell’s next state depends
only on its current state and those of its eight neighbors. Specifically, a live cell survives if it has
exactly 2 or 3 live neighbors (otherwise it dies), while a dead cell becomes alive if it has exactly 3 live
neighbors (otherwise it remains dead). Despite the simplicity of these rules, the Game of Life exhibits

62

(a)

(b)

Figure 11: LLMs can learn the invariant measure of chaotic systems despite unpredictable
trajectories. (a) Chaotic systems like the Lorenz equations display sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
Tiny perturbations to the initial conditions (orange) diverge exponentially, making long-term predictions
impossible when simulating with limited computation and precision on a computer. (b) 3000 sampled points
from the distribution modeled by the LLM (left) and from the invariant measure of the Lorenz system (right).
Color denotes kernel density estimation of each density.

remarkably complex emergent behavior, including stable structures (blocks), periodic oscillators
(blinkers), mobile patterns (gliders), and structures that generate infinite streams of gliders (glider
guns). The system also happens to be Turing-complete, with a specific initial configuration specifying
the program, it is capable of universal computation.

Appendix F. Emergence

Lorenz System and Chaotic Dynamics For the Lorenz system, a canonical example of a chaotic
ODE, we can observe a different kind of emergence (Type-0 in Carroll and Parola (2024)). There
exists a canonical invariant measure in dynamical systems (under some regularity conditions) known
as the SRB measure(Metzger, 2000). States evolved for a long time in the Lorenz system will converge
this measure. As the Lorenz system is chaotic, tiny perturbations are exponentially amplified through
time at a rate related to the largest Lyapunov exponent λ1 ≈ 0.9. There is a precise sense in which
entropy is created in this system at a rate of λ1 log2(e) bits per second, formalized through Pesin’s
theorem (Pesin, 1977), despite the fact that it is a purely deterministic process. Intuitively one can
see this picture when simulating the system using fixed precision numbers, and seeing log2(e) bits of
that description replaced with unpredictable random content after every Lyapunov time 1/λ1. On
the one hand randomness is produced, but it is not uniformly random. Rather, there is a stationary
measure in the shape of a butterfly, and an observer who has lost track of all previous bits due to
chaos can still learn the shape of the butterfly. Moreover, the shape of the stationary measure is not
immediately obvious from the ODE, it is emergent and cannot easily be understood without intensive
numerical simulation of the system (hence why most of chaos theory was developed after computers).

To demonstrate this interplay, we train a language model to predict the first B = 10 bits of the
future state Φt(X) from an initial state sampled uniformly from the box X ∼ U [−20, 20]3 + 20[0, 0, 1]
quantized to B bits, in comparison to directly modeling Φt(X). For both we set the time t to be
30 Lyapunov times into the future, t = 30/λ1. The resulting model has a nearly identical loss and
estimated epiplexity in the two settings. Despite being unable to distinguish the initial conditions,
the LLM learns the invariant (SRB) measure to a reasonable approximation as shown in Figure 11b.

63

LLM modeled DistributionInvariant MeasureWith very limited compute the stationary measure is not predictable apriori from the dynamics, but
with more compute it is merely a consequence. The epiplexity of the attractor for limited compute
may be larger than a description of the dynamics ST (Φt(X)) > ST (Φ, t).
Chess: AlphaZero and Minimax A qualitatively different kind of example can be had by
considering the models produced by AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018) and the theoretically optimal
minimax solution for these two player zero sum perfect information games (von Neumann, 1928;
Shannon, 1950). The minimax strategy can be implemented by a short program, and with sufficient
compute (exponential in the size of the board (Fraenkel and Lichtenstein, 1981)) the optimal strategy
can be found. On the other hand the CNN policy and value network produced by AlphaZero contain
10s of millions of parameters. Given that the rules of chess can be encoded in just a few hundred
bytes, and the algorithm used to train the model can be simply described and also implemented by a
short program, one may wonder where does this information come from? With the other examples
of emergent phenomena in mind, we can make sense of this information being produced by the
computational process of the AlphaZero system. In contrast, with unbounded compute, the best
strategy contains little information.

To summarize, due to the existence of emergent phenomena, even systems that have simple generating
processes or simple descriptions can lead to large amounts of structural information to be learned by
computationally constrained observers.

Appendix G. Induction is Not Specific to Autoregressive Factorization

One might get the impression that key constraint that leads to this induction phenomenon is the
autoregressive factorization, as it is intuitive to see how such a model needs to perform induction
in-context to achieve minimum loss. However, we argue this phenomenon takes place with other
classes of generative models trained as long as they are trained with Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE) or its approximations.

In MLE, a generative model allowing explicit likelihood evaluation is trained to maximize the likelihood
of the data. Computing the likelihood can be significantly more computationally challenging than
sampling from the distribution P. This distinction is particularly clear in the examples we gave
where the ground-truth P is a mixture distribution represented by a latent variable model with the
CA initial state or Markov chain transition matrix acting as the latent variable Z. Given access
to PX|Z (equivalent to some easy to implement forward function F ), sampling is easy as long as
PZ is a simple, but computing PX (x) for some input x requires evaluating an intractable integral
PX (x) = (cid:82) PX|Z(x|z)PZ(z) dz due to the high-dimensionality of Z. As such, a model given a limited
compute-budget is forced to learn a cheaper but more sophisticated algorithm for computing PX (x),
often involving approximating the inverse PZ|X either explicitly as done in expectation–maximization-
type algorithms and Variational Autoencoders (Kingma et al., 2013), or implicitly as we illustrated
for the autoregressive transformer.

Appendix H. Minimum Description Legnth

Intuitively, L(H) can be interpreted as the structural information, and − log P (x | H) can be
understood as the remaining random information that cannot be predicted by the best model in H.
A main problem with the crude two-part code is that it does not prescribe how one should design
the code for H (i.e., a procedure for describing H within H). The description of a particular H can
be short under one code but very large under another, which could require additional knowledge to
resolve. To circumvent this issue, one can use a more refined one-part code that describes the data

64

with the entire model class H rather than any single model H. One of the most important one-part
codes is the normalized maximum likelihood code.

Definition 31 (Normalized maximum likelhood code (Grünwald, 2007)) The NML distri-
bution P NML

: {0, 1}n×d → [0, 1] of a probablistic model class H is:

H

P NML

H (x) =

P (x | (cid:98)H(x))
y∈{0,1}n×d P (y | (cid:98)H(y))

(cid:80)

,

where (cid:98)H(x) = arg maxH∈H P (x | H) is the maximum likelihood estimator for x.

Crucially, notice that the NML code only depends on H rather than any particular H ∈ H, so we
do not have to design a particular code for H. Unfortunately, the NML code requires integrating
over the maximum likelihood estimator for all possible data, which is intractable for most practical
models such as deep neural networks. We can instead use a more tractable variant of one-part code
based on sequential prediction called prequential coding.

Definition 32 (Prequential code (Grünwald, 2007)) The prequential distribution P PREQ
[0, 1] of a probabilistic model class H is:

H

: {0, 1}n×d →

P PREQ
H

(x) =

n
(cid:89)

k=1

P (xk | (cid:98)H(x1:k)),

where (cid:98)H(x1:k) = arg maxH∈H P (x1:k | H) is the MLE for the first k elements of x.

This definition above uses the MLE for updating (cid:98)H but there are in fact no constraints on how the
update is performed. We may use any update method of our choice to produce the next model in the
sequence, so long as it only depends on the previous data. This means that we can naturally adapt it
for deep learning, where we use stochastic gradient descent to update the model sequentially.

A code cannot be optimal simultaneously for all possible data x unless it has knowledge of the
particular x. Therefore, it is useful to characterize how close a given code is to the optimal model,
which can be formalized via the notion of regret.

Definition 33 (Regret (Grünwald, 2007)) The regret of a code Q relative to H for x is the
additional number of bits needed to encode x using Q compared to the best model in hindsight,

Reg(Q, H, x) = − log Q(x) − min
H∈H

{− log P (x | H)}.

Under this notion of penalty, the NML is optimal in the sense that it achieves the minimax regret.
The regret provides a way to compare different codes. Consider the two-part regret of the crude
two-part code P 2P(·) with minimizer H ⋆ and associated predictive distribution P (· | H ⋆),

Reg(P 2P, H, x) = L(H ⋆) + log

1
P (x | H ⋆)

− log

1
P (x | (cid:98)H)

.

This means that for a two-part code, the regret is an upper bound on the description length of
the model. For sufficiently large n, the last two terms become close to each other and Reg(P 2P, H, x) ≈
L(H ⋆). In the case of NML, the regret is the minimax regret that Reg(P NML
(cid:98)H(y)). This quantity is independent of x, which is also called parametric complexity of H, because
it measures how expressive the entire model class is by counting the total amount of possible data
sequences the model class can model well.

H , H, x) = log (cid:80)

y∈{0,1}n P (y |

65

